=== PAGE 1 ===
IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis (2026) 46, 647–712
https://doi.org/10.1093/imanum/draf028
Advance Access publication on 15 August 2025
The parametric complexity of operator learning
SAMUEL LANTHALER∗ AND ANDREW M. STUART
California Institute of Technology, 1200 E California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
∗Corresponding author: slanth@caltech.edu
[Received on 28 February 2024; revised on 21 October 2024]
Neural operator architectures employ neural networks to approximate operators mapping between Banach
spaces of functions; they may be used to accelerate model evaluations via emulation, or to discover models
from data. Consequently, the methodology has received increasing attention over recent years, giving rise
to the rapidly growing field of operator learning. The first contribution of this paper is to prove that for
general classes of operators, which are characterized only by their C
r- or Lipschitz-regularity, operator
learning suffers from a ‘curse of parametric complexity’, which is an infinite-dimensional analogue of the
well-known curse of dimensionality encountered in high-dimensional approximation problems. The result
is applicable to a wide variety of existing neural operators, including PCA-Net, DeepONet and the Fourier
neural operator. The second contribution of the paper is to prove that this general curse can be overcome for
solution operators defined by the Hamilton–Jacobi (HJ) equation; this is achieved by leveraging additional
structure in the underlying solution operator, going beyond regularity. To this end a novel neural operator
architecture is introduced, termed HJ-Net, which explicitly takes into account characteristic information
of the underlying Hamiltonian system. Error and complexity estimates are derived for HJ-Net, which
show that this architecture can provably beat the curse of parametric complexity related to the infinite-
dimensional input and output function spaces.
Keywords: operator learning; complexity; Hamilton–Jacobi; deep learning.
1. Introduction
This paper is devoted to a study of the computational complexity of the approximation of maps between
Banach spaces by means of neural operators. The paper has two main focii: establishing a complexity
barrier for general classes of C
r− or Lipschitz regular maps; and then showing that this barrier can be
beaten for Hamilton–Jacobi (HJ) equations. In Subsection 1.1 we give a detailed literature review; we set
in context the definition of ‘the curse of parametric complexity’ that we introduce and use in this paper;
and we highlight our main contributions. Then, in Subsection 1.2, we overview the organization of the
remainder of the paper.
1.1 Context and literature review
The use of neural networks to learn operators, typically mapping between Banach spaces of functions
defined over subsets of finite-dimensional Euclidean space and referred to as neural operators ,i s
receiving growing interest in the computational science and engineering community ( Chen & Chen,
1995; Zhu & Zabaras, 2018 ; Bhattacharya et al. , 2021 ; Khoo et al. , 2021 ; Li et al. , 2021 ; Nelsen &
Stuart, 2021; Lu et al., 2021b; Boullé et al., 2022). The methodology has the potential for accelerating
numerical methods for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) when a model relating inputs and
outputs is known; and it has the potential for discovering input–output maps from data when no model
is available.
© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications. All rights reserved.
For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained
through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact
journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 2 ===
648 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
The computational complexity of learning and evaluating such neural operators is crucial to
understanding when the methods will be effective. Numerical experiments addressing this issue may be
found in de Hoop et al. (2022) and the analysis of linear problems from this perspective may be found in
Boullé & Townsend (2022); de Hoop et al. (2023). Universal approximation theorems, applicable beyond
the linear setting, may be found in Chen & Chen (1995) ; Bhattacharya et al. (2021); Kovachki et al.
(2021); Lu et al. (2021b); Lanthaler et al. (2022); Yo uet al. (2022); Kovachki et al. (2023); Lanthaler
et al. (2023a), but such theorems do not address the cost of achieving a given small error.
Early work on operator approximation ( Mhaskar & Hahm, 1997 ) presents first quantitative bounds;
most notably, this work identifies the continuous nonlinear n-widths of a space of continuous functionals
defined on L2-spaces, showing that these n-widths decay at most (poly-)logarithmically in n. Both upper
and lower bounds are derived in this specific setting. More recently, upper bounds on the computational
complexity of recent approaches to operator learning based on deep neural networks, including the
DeepONet (Lu et al., 2021b) and the Fourier neural operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2021), have been studied in
more detail. Specific operator learning tasks arising in PDEs have been considered in the papers Schwab
& Zech (2019) ; Kovachki et al. (2021); Deng et al. (2022); Herrmann et al. (2024); Lanthaler et al.
(2022); Ryck & Mishra (2022); Marcati & Schwab (2023). Related complexity analysis for the PCA-Net
architecture (Bhattacharya et al., 2021) has recently been established in Lanthaler (2023). These papers
studying computational complexity focus on the issue of beating a form of the ‘curse of dimensionality
(CoD)’ in these operator approximation tasks.
In these operator learning problems the input and output spaces are infinite-dimensional, and hence
the meaning of the CoD could be ambiguous. In this infinite-dimensional context ‘beating the curse’ is
interpreted as identifying problems, and operator approximations applied to those problems, for which
a measure of evaluation cost (referred to as their complexity) grows only algebraically with the inverse
of the desired error. As shown rigorously in
Lanthaler (2023) this is a nontrivial issue: for the PCA-Net
architecture it has been established that such algebraic complexity and error bounds cannot be achieved
for general Lipschitz (and even more regular) operators.
As will be explained in detail in this work, this fact is not specific to PCA-Net, but extends to many
other neural operator architectures. In fact, it can be interpreted as a scaling limit of the conventional
CoD; this conventional curse affects finite-dimensional approximation problems when the underlying
dimension d is very large. It can be shown that (ReLU) neural networks cannot overcome this curse, in
general. As a consequence, neural operators, which build on neural networks, suffer from the scaling
limit of this curse in infinite dimensions. To distinguish this infinite-dimensional phenomenon from the
conventional CoD encountered in high-but-finite-dimensional approximation problems we will refer to
the scaling limit identified in this work as ‘the curse of parametric complexity’ .
The first contribution of this paper is to prove that for general classes of operators, which are
characterized only by their Cr- or Lipschitz-regularity, operator learning suffers from such a curse of
parametric complexity: Theorem 2.11 (and a variant thereof, Theorem 2.27) shows that, in this setting,
there exist operators (and indeed even real-valued functionals) that are ϵ−approximable only with
parametric model complexity that grows exponentially in ϵ−1.
To overcome the general curse of parametric complexity implied by Theorem 2.11 (and Theorem
2.27) efficient operator learning frameworks therefore have to leverage additional structure present
in the operators of interest, going beyond Cr- or Lipschitz-regularity. Previous work on overcoming
this curse for operator learning has mostly focused on operator holomorphy ( Schwab & Zech, 2019 ;
Herrmann et al., 2020; Lanthaler et al., 2022) and the emulation of numerical methods ( Kovachki et al.,
2021; Lanthaler et al., 2022; Lanthaler, 2023; Marcati & Schwab, 2023 ) as two basic mechanisms for
overcoming the curse of parametric complexity for specific operators of interest. A notable exception
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 3 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 649
are the complexity estimates for DeepONets in (Deng et al., 2022). These estimates are based on explicit
representation of the solution; most prominently, this is achieved via the Cole–Hopf transformation
for the viscous Burgers equation. Another distinct mechanism to overcome the curse of parametric
complexity is highlighted by the notion of Barron spaces, e.g., Barron (1993); Bach (2017); Ma et al.
(2022), which have recently been extended to the operator learning setting inKorolev (2022). In the finite-
dimensional context functions belonging to such Barron spaces can be approximated at Monte-Carlo
rates, which are independent of the dimension of the underlying domain. As shown in Korolev (2022)
similar rates can be established in an infinite-dimensional Barron class setting. The curse of parametric
complexity derived in this work indicates that spaces of r-times Fréchet differentiable operators cannot
embed into operator Barron spaces, no matter the degree of differentiability r.
An abstract characterization of the entire class of operators that allow for efficient approximation by
neural operators would be very desirable. Unfortunately, this appears to be out of reach, at the current
state of analysis. Indeed, as far as the authors are aware, there does not even exist such a characterization
for any class of standard numerical methods, such as finite difference, finite element or spectral, viewed
as operator approximators. Therefore, in order to identify settings in which operator learning can be
effective (without suffering from the general curse of parametric complexity) we restrict attention to
specific classes of operators of interest.
The HJ equations present an application area that has the potential to be significantly impacted by the
use of ideas from neural networks, especially regarding the solution of problems for functions defined
over subsets of high-dimensional ( d) Euclidean space (Darbon & Osher, 2016; Chow et al., 2017, 2019;
Darbon et al., 2020); in particular beating the CoD with respect to this dimension d has been the focus.
We highlight works that propose adapted neural network architectures, reflecting known structure of
viscosity solutions of the HJ equation, to approximate and represent individual solutions (Darbon &
Meng, 2021; Meng et al., 2022). This research includes studies of analytical convergence rates for such
architectures, as well as empirical works studying their practical performance ( Nakamura-Zimmerer
et al. , 2020 ; Huré et al. , 2021 ; Darbon et al. , 2023 ). However, this work does not include operator
learning, as it concerns settings in which only fixed instances of the PDE are solved. The purpose of
the second part of this paper is to study the design and analysis of neural operators to approximate the
solution operator for HJ equations; this operator maps the initial condition (a function) to the solution at
a later time (another function).
The second contribution of the paper is to prove in Theorem 5.1 that the general curse of parametric
complexity can be overcome for maps defined by the solution operator of the HJ equation; this is achieved
by exposing additional structure in the underlying solution operator, different from holomorphy and
emulation and going beyond regularity, that can be leveraged by neural operators; for the HJ equations,
the identified structure relies on representation of solutions of the HJ equations in terms of characteristics.
In this paper the dimension d of the underlying spatial domain will be fixed and we do not study the CoD
with respect to d. Instead, we demonstrate that it is possible to beat the curse of parametric complexity
with respect to the infinite-dimensional nature of the input function for fixed (and moderate) d.
1.2 Organization
In Section 2 we present the first contribution: Theorem 2.11, together with the closely related Theorem
2.27, which extends the general, but not exhaustive setting Theorem2.11, to include the FNO, establishes
that the curse of parametric complexity is to be expected in operator learning. The following sections then
focus on the second contribution, and hence on solution operators associated with the HJ equation; in
Theorem 5.1 we prove that additional structure in the solution operator for this equation can be leveraged
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 4 ===
650 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
FIG. 1. Diagrammatic illustration of operator learning based on an encoding E, a neural network Ψ and a reconstruction R.
to beat the curse of parametric complexity. In Section3 we describe the precise setting for the HJ equation
employed throughout this paper; we recall the method of characteristics for solution of the equations; and
we describe a short-time existence theorem. Section
4 introduces the proposed neural operator, the HJ-
Net, based on learning the flow underlying the method of characteristics and combining it with scattered
data approximation. In Section 5 we state our approximation theorem for the proposed HJ-Net, resulting
in complexity estimates that demonstrate that the curse of parametric complexity is avoided in relation to
the infinite-dimensional nature of the input space (of initial conditions). Section 6 contains concluding
remarks. While the high-level structure of the proofs is contained in the main body of the paper, many
technical details are collected in the appendix, to promote readability.
2. The curse of parametric complexity
Operator learning seeks to employ neural networks to efficiently approximate operators mapping
between infinite-dimensional Banach spaces of functions. To enable implementation of these methods
in practice maps between the formally infinite-dimensional spaces have to be approximated using only
a finite number of degrees of freedom.
Commonly, operator learning frameworks can therefore be written in terms of an encoding, a neural
network and a reconstruction step as shown in Fig. 1. The first step E encodes the infinite-dimensional
input using a finite number of degrees of freedom. The second approximation step Ψ maps the encoded
input to an encoded, finite-dimensional output. The final reconstruction step R reconstructs an output
function, given the finite-dimensional output of the approximation mapping. The composition of these
encoding, approximation and reconstruction mappings thus takes aninput function and maps it to another
output function , and hence defines an operator. Existing operator learning frameworks differ in their
particular choice of the encoder, neural network architecture and reconstruction mappings.
We start by giving background discussion on the CoD in finite dimensions, in Subsection 2.1.
We then describe the subject in detail for neural network-based operator learning, resulting in our
notion of the curse of parametric complexity, in Subsection 2.2. In Subsection 2.3 we state our main
theorem concerning the curse of parametric complexity for neural operators. Subsection2.4 demonstrates
that the main theorem applies to PCA-Net, DeepONet and the NOMAD neural network architectures.
Subsection 2.5 extends the main theorem to the FNO since it sits outside the framework introduced in
Subsection 2.2.
2.1 CoD for neural networks
Since the neural network mapping Ψ : RDX → RDY in the decomposition shown in Fig. 1 typically
maps between high-dimensional (encoded) spaces, with DX , DY ≫1, most approaches to operator
learning employ neural networks to learn this mapping. The motivation for this is that, empirically,
neural networks have been found to be exceptionally well suited for the approximation of such high-
dimensional functions in diverse applications (
Goodfellow et al. , 2016 ). Detailed investigation of the
approximation theory of neural networks, including quantitative upper and lower approximation error
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 5 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 651
bounds, has thus attracted a lot of attention in recent years ( Y arotsky, 2017; Y arotsky & Zhevnerchuk,
2020; DeV oreet al. , 2021 ; Kohler & Langer, 2021 ; Lu et al. , 2021a ). Since we build on this analysis
we summarize the relevant part of it here, restricting attention to ReLU neural networks in this work, as
defined next; generalization to the use of other (piecewise polynomial) activation functions is possible.
2.1.1 ReLU neural networks. Fix integer L and integers{dℓ}L+1
ℓ=0 .L e t Aℓ∈ Rdℓ+1×dℓ and bℓ∈ Rdℓ+1
for ℓ= 0,... , L. A ReLU neural network Ψ : RDX → RDY , x↦→ Ψ( x) is a mapping of the form
⎧
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎩
x
0 = x,
xℓ+1 = σ( Aℓxℓ+ bℓ), ℓ= 0,··· , L− 1,
Ψ( x)= ALxL + bL,
(2.1)
where d0 = DX and dL+1 = DY . Here, the activation function σ : R→ R is extended pointwise to act
on any Euclidean space; and in what follows we employ the ReLU activation function σ( x)= min{0, x}.
We let θ :={ Aℓ, bℓ}L
ℓ=0 and note that we have defined parametric mapping Ψ(· )= Ψ(· ; θ) . We define
the depth of Ψ as the number of layers, and the size of Ψ as the number of nonzero weights and biases,
i.e.,
depth(Ψ )= L,s i z e (Ψ )=
L∑
ℓ=0
{
∥Aℓ∥0 +∥bℓ∥0
}
,
where∥·∥0 counts the number of nonzero entries of a matrix or vector.
2.1.2 Two simple facts from ReLU neural network calculus. The following facts will be used without
further comment (see e.g. (Opschoor et al., 2022, section 2.2.3) for a discussion of more general results):
If Ψ : RDX → RDY is an ReLU neural network, and A∈ RDX×d is a matrix, then there exists an ReLU
neural network ˜Ψ : Rd → RDY , such that
⎧
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎩
˜Ψ( x)= Ψ( Ax), for all x∈ R
d,
depth(˜Ψ) = depth(Ψ )+ 1,
size(˜Ψ) ≤ 2∥A∥0 + 2s i z e(Ψ ).
(2.2)
Similarly, if V ∈ Rd×DY is a matrix then there exists an ReLU neural network ˆΨ : RDX → Rd, such
that
⎧
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎩
ˆΨ( x)= VΨ( x), for all x∈ R
d,
depth(ˆΨ) = depth(Ψ )+ 1,
size(ˆΨ) ≤ 2∥V∥0 + 2s i z e(Ψ ).
(2.3)
The main nontrivial issue in (2.2) and (2.3) is to preserve the potentially sparse structure of the underlying
neural networks; this is based on a concept of ‘sparse concatenation’ from Petersen & V oigtlaender
(2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 6 ===
652 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
2.1.3 Approximation theory and CoD for ReLU networks. One overall finding of research into
the approximation power of ReLU neural networks is that, for function approximation in spaces
characterized by smoothness, neural networks cannot entirely overcome the CoD ( Y arotsky, 2017;
Y arotsky & Zhevnerchuk, 2020; Kohler & Langer, 2021 ; Lu et al. , 2021a ). This is illustrated by the
following result, which builds on ( Y arotsky, 2017, theorem 5) derived by D. Y arotsky:
PROPOSITION 2.1 (Neural network CoD). Let r ∈ N be given. For any dimension D ∈ N there exists
fD,r ∈ Cr([0, 1]D; R) and constant ϵ,γ> 0, such that any ReLU neural network Ψ : RD → R achieving
accuracy
sup
x∈[0,1]D
|fD,r(x)− Ψ( x)|≤ ϵ,
with ϵ≤ ϵ, has size at least size (Ψ )≥ ϵ−γ D/r. The constant ϵ= ϵ(r)> 0 depends only on r, and
γ> 0 is universal. ♦
The proof of Proposition 2.1 is included in Appendix A1. Proposition 2.1 shows that neural
network approximation of a function between high-dimensional Euclidean spaces suffers from a CoD,
characterized by an algebraic complexity with a potentially large exponent proportional to the dimension
D≫1. This lower bound is similar to the approximation rates (upper bounds) achieved by traditional
methods,
1 such as polynomial approximation. This fact suggests that the empirically observed efficiency
of neural networks may well rely on additional structure of functions f of practical interest, beyond their
smoothness; for relevant results in this direction see, for example, Mhaskar et al. (2016); Gribonval et al.
(2022).
2.2 Curse of parametric complexity in operator learning
In this work we consider the approximation of an underlying operator S† : X → Y acting between
Banach spaces; specifically, we assume that the dimensions of the spaces X , Y are infinite.G i v e nt h e
CoD in the finite-dimensional setting, Proposition 2.1 and letting D→∞ one would generally expect
a super-algebraic, potentially even exponential, lower bound on the ‘complexity’ of neural operators
S approximating such S†, as a function of the accuracy ϵ. In this subsection we make this statement
precise for a general class of neural operators, in Theorem 2.11. This is preceded by a discussion of
relevant structure of compact sets in infinite-dimensional function spaces and a discussion of a suitable
class of ‘neural operators’.
2.2.1 Infinite-dimensional hypercubes. Proposition 2.1 was stated for the unit cube [0, 1] D as the
underlying domain. In the finite-dimensional setting of Proposition 2.1 the approximation rate turns out
to be independent of the underlying compact domain, provided that the domain has nonempty interior
and assuming a Lipschitz continuous boundary. This is in contrast to the infinite-dimensional case, where
compact domains necessarily have empty interior and where the convergence rate depends on the specific
structure of the domain. To state our complexity bound for operator approximation we will therefore need
to discuss the prototypical structure of compact subsets K⊂ X .
1 Ignoring the potentially beneficial factor γ .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 7 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 653
To fix intuition we temporarily consider X a function space (for example, a Hölder, Lebesgue or
Sobolev space). In this case, the most common way to define a compact subsetK⊂ X is via a smoothness
constraint, as illustrated by the following concrete example:
EXAMPLE 2.2. Assume that X = Cs(Ω) is the space of s-times continuously differentiable functions on
a bounded domain Ω ⊂ Rd. Then, for ρ> s and upper bound M > 0, the subset K⊂ X , defined as
K=
{
u∈ Cρ(Ω)
⏐⏐∥u∥Cρ ≤ M
}
, (2.4)
is a compact subset of X . Here, we define the Cρ -norm as
∥u∥Cρ = max
|ν|≤ρ
sup
x∈Ω
|Dν u(x)|. (2.5)
♦
To better understand the approximation theory of operators S† : K ⊂ X → Y we would like to
understand the structure of such K. Our point of view is inspired by Fourier analysis, according to which
smoothness of u∈ K roughly corresponds to a decay rate of the Fourier coefficients of u. In particular,
u is guaranteed to belong to the set ( 2.4), if u is of the form
u= A
∞∑
j=1
j−α yjej, yj ∈ [0, 1] for all j∈ N, (2.6)
for a sufficiently large decay rate α> 0, small constant A > 0 and where ej : Rd → R denotes
the periodic Fourier (sine/cosine) basis, restricted to Ω. We include a proof of this fact at the end of
this subsection (see Lemma 2.7), where we also identify relevant decay rate α. In this sense the set K in
(2.4) could be said to ‘contain’ an infinite-dimensional hypercube∏∞
j=1[0, Aj−α ], with decay rateα. Such
hypercubes will replace the finite-dimensional unit cube [0, 1]D in our analysis of operator approximation
in infinite dimensions.
We would like to point out that a similar observation holds for many other sets K defined by a
smoothness constraint, such as sets in Sobolev spaces defined by a smoothness constraint, {∥u∥Hρ ≤
M}⊂ Hs(Ω), or more generally {∥u∥Wρ,p ≤ M}⊂ Ws,p(Ω), for any 1 ≤ p ≤∞ , but also Besov
spaces, spaces of functions of bounded variation and others share a similar structure. Bounded balls in
all of these spaces contain infinite-dimensional hypercubes, consisting of elements of the form ( 2.6). We
note in passing that, in general, it may be more natural to replace the trigonometric basis in (2.6)b ys o m e
other choice of basis, such as polynomials, splines, wavelets or a more general (frame) expansion. We
refer to e.g., Christensen et al. (2003); Heil (2010) for general background and Herrmann et al. (2024)
for an example of such a setting in the context of holomorphic operators.
The above considerations lead us to the following definition of an abstract hypercube:
DEFINITION 2.3. Let e1, e2,··· ∈ X be a sequence of linearly independent and normed elements,
∥ej∥X = 1. Given constants A > 0, α> 1, we say that K ⊂ X contains an infinite-dimensional
cube Qα = Qα(A; e1, e2,...) , if the following hold:
(1) K contains the set Qα consisting of all u of the form ( 2.6);
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 8 ===
654 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
(2) the set{ej}j∈N possesses a bounded bi-orthogonal sequence of functionals, labellede∗
1, e∗
2,···∈ X∗,
in the continuous dual of X ,2 i.e., we assume that e∗
k(ej)= δjk for all j, k∈ N, and that there exists
M > 0, such that ∥e∗
k∥X∗ ≤ M for all k∈ N.
♦
REMARK 2.4. Property (2) in Definition 2.3, i.e., the assumed existence of a bi-orthogonal sequence e∗
j ,
ensures that there exist ‘coordinate projections’: if u is of the form ( 2.6) then the jth coefficient yj can be
retrieved from u as yj = A−1jα e∗
j (u). This allows us to uniquely identify u∈ Qα with a set of coefficients
(y1, y2, ...) ∈ [0, 1]∞. ♦
REMARK 2.5. The decay rate α of the infinite-dimensional cube Qα ⊂ K provides a measure of its
‘asymptotic size’ or ‘complexity’. In terms of our complexity bounds this decay rate will play a special
role. Hence, we will usually retain this dependence explicitly by writing Q
α , but suppress the additional
dependence on A and e1, e2,... in the following text. ♦
The notion of infinite-dimensional cubes introduced in Definition 2.3 is only a minor generalization
of an established notion of cube embeddings, introduced by Donoho ( Donoho, 2001) in a Hilbert space
setting. We refer to (Dahlke et al., 2015, chapter 5) for a pedagogical exposition of such cube embeddings
in the Hilbert space setting, and their relation to the Kolmogorov entropy of K.
REMARK 2.6. The complexity bounds established in this work will be based on infinite-dimensional
hypercubes. An interesting question, left for future work, is whether our main result on the curse of
parametric complexity, Theorem
2.11, could be stated directly in terms of the Kolmogorov complexity
of K, or other notions such as the Kolmogorov n-width (DeV ore, 1998). ♦
Our definition of an infinite-dimensional hypercube is natural in view of the following lemma, the
discussion following Example 2.2 and other similar results.
LEMMA 2.7. Assume that X = Cs(Ω) is the space of s-times continuously differentiable functions on a
bounded domain Ω ⊂ Rd. Choose ρ> s and define K, compact in X ,b y
K=
{
u∈ Cρ(Ω)
⏐⏐∥u∥Cρ ≤ M
}
,
with constant M > 0. Then K contains an infinite-dimensional hypercube Qα , for any α> 1+ ρ−s
d . ♦
The proof of Lemma2.7 is included in AppendixA. While we have focused on spaces of continuously
differentiable functions, similar considerations also apply to other smoothness spaces, such as the
Sobolev spaces Ws,p, and more general Besov spaces.
2.2.2 Curse of parametric complexity. The main question to be addressed in this section is the
following: given K ⊂ X compact, S† : X → Y an r-times Fréchet differentiable operator to be
approximated by a neural operator S : X → Y and given a desired approximation accuracy ϵ> 0
how many tunable parameters (in the architecture of S) are required to achieve
sup
u∈K
∥S†(u)− S(u)∥Y ≤ ϵ?
2 If X is a Hilbert space such a bi-orthogonal sequence always exists for independent e1, e2,···∈ X .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 9 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 655
The answer to this question clearly depends on our assumptions on K ⊂ X , Y and the class of neural
operators S.
Assume K ⊂ X contains a hypercube Qα . Consistent with our discussion in the last subsection we
will assume that K⊂ X contains an infinite-dimensional hypercube Qα , as introduced in Definition 2.3,
with algebraic decay rate α> 0.
Assume Y = R, i.e., S† is a functional. The approximation of an operator S† : X → Y with potentially
infinite-dimensional output space Y is generally harder to achieve than the approximation of a functional
S† : X → R with one-dimensional output; indeed, if dim(Y)≥ 1 then R can be embedded in Y and any
functional X → R gives rise to an operator X → Y under this embedding. To simplify our discussion
we will therefore initially restrict attention to the approximation of functionals, with the aim of showing
that even the approximation of r-times Fréchet differentiable functionals is generally intractable.
Assume S is of neural network-type. Assuming that Y = R we must finally introduce a rigorous
notion of the relevant class of approximating functionals S : X → R, i.e., define a class of ‘neural
operators/functionals’ approximating the functional S†.
DEFINITION 2.8 (Functional of neural network-type). We will say that a (neural) functional S : X → R
is a ‘functional of neural network-type’, if it can be written in the form
S(u)= Φ(Lu), ∀ u∈ K, (2.7)
where for some ℓ∈ N, L : X → Rℓ is a linear map, and Φ : Rℓ → R is an ReLU neural network
(potentially sparse). ♦
If S is a functional of neural network-type, we define the complexity of S, denoted cmplx(S),a st h e
smallest size of a neural network Φ for which there exists linear map L such that a representation of the
form (2.7) holds, i.e.,
cmplx(S) := min
Φ
size(Φ), (2.8)
where the minimum is taken over all possible Φ in (2.7).
REMARK 2.9. Without loss of generality we may assume that ℓ≤ size(Φ) in (2.7) and (2.8). Indeed, if this
is not the case then size (Φ) < ℓand we can show that it is possible to construct another representation
pair (˜Φ, ˜L) in (2.7), consisting of a neural network ˜Φ : R˜ℓ→ R, linear map ˜L : X → R˜ℓ and such that
˜ℓ≤ size(˜Φ): To see why let us assume that ˜ℓ := size(Φ) < ℓ.L e t A be the weight matrix in the first
input layer of Φ. Since
∥A∥0 ≤ ˜ℓ<ℓ ,
at most˜ℓcolumns of A can be nonvanishing. Write the matrix A= [a1, a2,... , aℓ] in terms of its column
vectors. Up to permutation we may assume that a˜ℓ+1 =···= aℓ= 0. We now drop the corresponding
columns in the input layer ofΦ and remove these unused components from the output of the linear mapL
in (2.7). This leads to a new map ˜L : X → R˜ℓ, with output components (˜Lu)j = (Lu)j for j= 1,... ,˜ℓ,
and we define ˜Φ : R˜ℓ→ R, as the neural network that is obtained from Φ by replacing the input matrix
A= [a1, ... , aℓ]b y˜A= [a1,... , a˜ℓ]. Then, ˜Φ◦ ˜L= Φ◦ L, so that ˜L and ˜Φ satisfy a representation of
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 10 ===
656 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
the form (2.7), but the dimension ˜ℓsatisfies˜ℓ= size(Φ)= size(˜Φ); the first equality is by definition of
˜ℓ, and the last equality holds because we only removed zero weights from Φ. In particular, this ensures
that˜ℓ≤ size(˜Φ) for this new representation, without affecting the size of the underlying neural network,
i.e., size(Φ)= size(˜Φ). ♦
More generally, we can consider Y = Y(Ω; Rp) a function space, consisting of functions v : Ω →
Rp with domain Ω ⊂ Rd.G i v e ny∈ Ω, we introduce the point-evaluation map
evy : Y → Rp,e v y(v) := v(y).
Provided that point-evaluation evy is well-defined for all v∈ Y we can readily extend the above notion
to operators, as follows:
DEFINITION 2.10 (Operator of neural network-type). Let Y = Y(Ω; Rp) be a function space on which
point-evaluation is well-defined. We will say that a (neural) operatorS : X → Y is an ‘operator of neural
network-type’, if for any evaluation point y ∈ Ω, the composition ev y ◦ S : X → Rp,e vy(S(u)) :=
S(u)(y), can be written in the form
evy ◦ S(u)= Φy(Lu), ∀ u∈ K, (2.9)
where L : X → Rℓ is a linear operator, and Φy : Rℓ→ Rp is an ReLU neural network that may depend
on the evaluation point y∈ Ω. In this case, we define
cmplx(S) := sup
y∈Ω
min
Φy
size(Φy).
♦
We next state our main result demonstrating a ‘curse of parametric complexity’ for functionals (and
operators) of neural network-type. This is followed by a detailed discussion of the implications of this
abstract result for four representative examples of operator learning frameworks: PCA-Net, DeepONet,
NOMAD and the Fourier neural operator.
2.3 Main theorem on curse of parametric complexity
The following result formalizes an analogue of the CoD in infinite-dimensions:
THEOREM 2.11 (Curse of parametric complexity). Let K⊂ X be a compact set in an infinite-dimensional
Banach space X . Assume that K contains an infinite-dimensional hypercube Qα for some α> 1. Then,
for any r ∈ N and δ> 0, there exists ϵ> 0 and an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional S† : K ⊂
X → R, such that approximation to accuracy ϵ≤ ϵby a functional Sϵ of neural network-type,
sup
u∈K
|S†(u)− Sϵ(u)|≤ ϵ, (2.10)
implies complexity bound cmplx(Sϵ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r); here c, ϵ> 0 are constants depending only
on α, δ and r. ♦
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 11 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 657
Before providing a sketch of the proof of Theorem 2.11 we note the following simple corollary,
whose proof is given in Appendix A.4.
COROLLARY 2.12. Let K⊂ X be a compact set in an infinite-dimensional Banach space X . Assume that
K contains an infinite-dimensional hypercube Qα for some α> 1. Let Y = Y(Ω; Rp) be a function
space with continuous embedding in C(Ω; Rp). Then, for any r∈ N and δ> 0, there exists ϵ> 0 and
an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional S† : K ⊂ X → Y, such that approximation to accuracy
ϵ≤ ϵby an operator Sϵ : X → Y of neural network-type,
sup
u∈K
∥S†(u)− Sϵ(u)∥≤ϵ, (2.11)
implies complexity bound cmplx(Sϵ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r); here c, ϵ> 0 are constants depending only
on α, δ and r. ♦
Proof of Theorem 2.11 (Sketch). Let Sϵ : X → R be any functional of neural network-type, achieving
approximation accuracy ( 2.10). In view of our definition of cmplx (Sϵ) in ( 2.8), to prove the claim, it
suffices to show that if L : X → Rℓ is a linear map and Φ : Rℓ→ R is an ReLU neural network, such
that
Sϵ(u)= Φ(Lu), ∀ u∈ X ,
then size(Φ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r).
The idea behind the proof of this fact is that if K⊂ X contains a hypercube Qα then for any D∈ N a
suitable rescaling of the finite-dimensional cube [0, 1] D can be embedded in K. More precisely, for any
D∈ N there exists an injective linear map ιD : [0, 1]D → K.
If we now consider the composition Sϵ◦ιD : RD → R then we observe that we have a decomposition
Sϵ◦ ιD(x)= Φ(L◦ ιD(x)), where
L◦ ιD : RD → Rℓ,
is linear, and
Φ : Rℓ→ R
is an ReLU neural network. In particular, there exists a matrix A∈ Rℓ×D, such that L◦ ιD(x)= Ax for
all x ∈ RD, and the mapping ΦD(x) := Sϵ◦ ιD(x) defines an ReLU neural network ΦD(x) = Φ(Ax),
whose size can be bounded by
size(ΦD)≤ 2s i z e(Φ)+ 2∥A∥0 (Equation 2.2)
≤ 2s i z e(Φ)+ 2ℓD
≤ 2s i z e(Φ)+ 2s i z e(Φ)D (Remark 2.9)
≤ 4s i z e(Φ)D.
Using Proposition 2.1, for any D∈ N, we are then able to construct a functional FD : K⊂ X → R,
mimicking the function fD : [0, 1] D ⊂ RD → R constructed in Proposition 2.1, and such that uniform
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 12 ===
658 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
approximation of FD by Sϵ (implying similar approximation of fD by ΦD) incurs a lower complexity
bound
size(Φ)≥ (4D)−1 size(ΦD)≥ CDϵ−γ D/r,
where CD > 0 is a constant depending on D. For this particular functional FD, and given the uniform
lower bound on size(Φ) above, it then follows that
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ CDϵ−γ D/r.
The first challenge is to make this strategy precise, and to determine theD-dependency of the constantCD.
As we will see this argument leads to a lower bound of roughly the form cmplx (Sϵ) ≳ (Dr(1+α)ϵ)−γ D/r.
At this point the argument is still for fixed D∈ N, and would only lead to an algebraic complexity
in ϵ−1. To extend this to an exponential lower bound in ϵ−1 we next observe that if the estimate
cmplx(Sϵ) ≳ (Dr(1+α)ϵ)−γ D/r could in fact be established for all D ∈ N simultaneously, i.e.,
if we could construct a single functional S†, for which the lower complexity bound cmplx (Sϵ) ≳
supD∈N(Dr(1+α)ϵ)−γ D/r were to hold, then setting D ≈ (eϵ)−1/(1+α)r on the right would imply that
cmplx(Sϵ) ≳ sup
D∈N
(Dr(1+α)ϵ)−γ D/r ≳ exp
(
cϵ−1/(1+α)r
⎞
,
with suitable c > 0. Leading to an exponential lower complexity bound for such S† the second main
challenge is thus to construct a single S† : K ⊂ X → R that effectively ‘embeds’ an infinite family of
functionals FD : K ⊂ X → R with complexity bounds as above. This will be achieved by defining S†
as a weighted sum of suitable functionals FD. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix A3. □
Several remarks are in order:
REMARK 2.13. Theorem 2.11 shows rigorously that in general operator learning suffers from a curse of
parametric complexity, in the sense that it is not possible to achieve better than exponential complexity
bounds for general classes of operators, which are merely determined by their ( C
r- or Lipschitz-)
regularity. As explained above this is a natural infinite-dimensional analogue of the CoD in finite-
dimensions (cp. Proposition 2.1), and motivates our terminology. We note that the lower bound of
Theorem 2.11 qualitatively matches general upper bounds for DeepONets derived in Liu et al. (2024).
It would be of interest to determine sharp rates. ♦
REMARK 2.14. Theorem 2.11 is derived for ReLU neural networks. With some effort, the argument
could be extended to more general, piecewise polynomial activation functions. While we believe that
the curse of parametric complexity has a fundamental character, we would like to point out that, for
nonstandard neural network architectures , algebraic approximation rates have been obtained ( Schwab
et al. , 2023); these results build on either ‘superexpressive’ activation functions or other nonstandard
architectures. Since these networks are not ordinary feedforward ReLU neural networks the algebraic
approximation rates of
Schwab et al. (2023) are not in contradiction with Theorem 2.11. While the
parametric complexity of the nonstandard neural operators in Schwab et al. (2023) is exponentially
smaller than the lower bound of Theorem2.11, it is conceivable that storing the neural network weights in
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 13 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 659
practice would require exponential accuracy (number of bits), to account for the highly unstable character
of super-expressive constructions. ♦
REMARK 2.15. Theorem 2.11 differs from previous results on the limitations of operator learning
frameworks, as e.g., addressed in Lanthaler et al. (2022); Seidman et al. (2022); Lanthaler et al. (2023b).
Earlier work focuses on the limitations imposed by a linear choice of the reconstruction mapping R.I n
contrast, the results of this work exhibit Ck-smooth operators and functionals, which are fundamentally
hard to approximate by neural network-based methods (with ReLU activation), irrespective of the choice
of reconstruction. ♦
REMARK 2.16. We finally link our main theorem to a related result for PCA-Net (Lanthaler, 2023, theorem
3.3), there derived in a complementary Hilbert space setting for X and Y; the result of Lanthaler (2023)
shows that, for PCA-Net, no fixed algebraic convergence rate can be achieved in the operator learning
of general Cr-operators between Hilbert spaces; this can be viewed as a milder version of the full curse
of parametric complexity identified in this work, expressed by an exponential lower complexity bound
in Theorem 2.11. ♦
To further illustrate an implication of Theorem 2.11 we provide the following example:
EXAMPLE 2.17 (Operator learning CoD). Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a domain. Let s,ρ∈ Z≥0 be given, with s <ρ ,
and consider the compact set
K=
{
u∈ Cρ(Ω)
⏐⏐∥u∥Cρ ≤ 1
}
⊂ Cs(Ω).
Fix r∈ N. By Lemma 2.7 K contains an infinite-dimensional hypercube Qα for any α> 1+ ρ−s
d .F i x
such α. Applying Theorem 2.11 it follows that there exists an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional
S† : Cs(Ω) → R and constant c,ϵ> 0, such that any family Sϵ : Cs(Ω) → R of functionals of neural
network-type, achieving accuracy
sup
u∈K
|S†(u)− Sϵ(u)|≤ ϵ, ∀ϵ≤ ϵ,
has complexity at least cmplx (Sϵ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(1+α)r) for ϵ≤ ϵ. Furthermore, the constants c, ϵ> 0
depend only on the parameters r, s,ρ,α. ♦
In the next subsection we aim to show the relevance of the above abstract result for concrete neural
operator architectures. Specifically, we show that three operator learning architectures from the literature
are of neural network-type (PCA-Net, DeepONet, NOMAD), and relate our notion of complexity to the
required number of tunable parameters for each. Finally, we show that even frameworks that are not
necessarily of neural network-type could suffer from a similar curse of parametric complexity. We make
this explicit for the Fourier neural operator in Subsection
2.5.
2.4 Examples of operators of neural network-type
We describe three representative neural operator architectures and show that they can be cast in the above
framework.
PCA-Net. We start with the PCA-Net architecture from Bhattacharya et al. (2021), anticipated in
the work Hesthaven & Ubbiali (2018) .I f X and Y are Hilbert spaces then a neural network can
be combined with principal component analysis (PCA) for the encoding and reconstruction on the
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 14 ===
660 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
underlying spaces, to define a neural operator architecture termed PCA-Net; the ingredients of this
architecture are orthonormal PCA bases φX
1 ,... ,φX
DX ∈ X and φY
1 ,... ,φY
DY ∈ Y, and a neural network
mapping Ψ : RDX → RDY . The encoder E is obtained by projection onto the {φX
j }DX
j=1 , whereas the
reconstruction R is defined by a linear expansion in {φY
j }DY
j=1. The resulting PCA-Net neural operator is
defined as
S(u)(y)=
DY∑
k=1
Ψk(α1,... ,αDX )φY
k (y), with αj :=⟨u,φX
j ⟩, j= 1,... , DX . (2.12)
Here, the neural networkΨ : RDX → RDY , with componentsΨk(· )= Ψk(· ; θ) , depends on parameters
that are optimized during training of the PCA-Net. The PCA basis functions φY
1 ,...φ Y
DY : Ω → Rp,
defining the reconstruction, are precomputed from the data using PCA analysis.
Given an evaluation point y ∈ Ω the composition ev y ◦ S, between S and the point-evaluation
mapping evy(v)= v(y), can now be written in the form
evy ◦ S(u)= Φy(Lu),
where L : X → RDX , Lu := (⟨u,φX
1 ⟩,... ,⟨u,φX
DX⟩is a linear mapping, and Φy(α) :=
∑ DY
k=1 Ψk(α)φY
k (y),f o rf i x e dy, is the composition of a neural network Ψ with a linear read-out; thus, Φy
is itself a neural network for fixed y. This shows that PCA-Net is of neural network-type.
The following lemma shows that the complexity of PCA-Net gives a lower bound on the number of
free parameters for the underlying neural network architecture.
LEMMA 2.18 (Complexity of PCA-Net). Assume that X and Y are Hilbert spaces, so that PCA-Net is
well-defined. Any PCA-Net S = R◦ Ψ ◦ E is of neural network-type, and
size(Ψ )≥ (2p+ 2)−1cmplx(S),
where the dimension p∈ N is fixed by the output-function space Y = Y(Ω; Rp). ♦
Thus, Lemma 2.18 implies a lower complexity bound size (Ψ ) ≳ cmplx(S). The detailed proof is
given in Appendix A.5.1. It thus follows from Corollary2.12 that operator learning with PCA-Net suffers
from a curse of parametric complexity:
PROPOSITION 2.19 (Curse of parametric complexity for PCA-Net). Assume the setting of Corollary 2.12,
with X , Y being Hilbert spaces. Then, for any r∈ N and δ> 0, there exists ϵ> 0 and an r-times Fréchet
differentiable functional S† : K ⊂ X → Y, such that approximation to accuracy ϵ≤ ϵb yaP C A - N e t
Sϵ : X → Y
sup
u∈K
∥S†(u)− Sϵ(u)∥≤ϵ, (2.13)
with encoder E, neural network Ψ and reconstruction R, implies complexity bound size (Ψ ) ≥
exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r); here c, ϵ> 0 are constants depending only on α, δ, r and p. ♦
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 15 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 661
DeepONet. A conceptually similar approach is followed by the DeepONet of Lu et al. (2021b), which
differs by learning the form of the representation in Y concurrently with the coefficients, and by allowing
for quite general input linear functionals {αj}DX
j=1 .
The DeepONet architecture defines the encoding E : X → RDX by a fixed choice of general linear
functionals ℓ1,... ,ℓDX ; these may be obtained, for example, by point evaluation at distinct ‘sensor
points’ or by projection onto PCA modes as in PCA-Net. The reconstruction R : RDY → Y is defined
by expansion with respect to a set of functions φ1,... ,φDY ∈ Y that are themselves finite-dimensional
neural networks to be learned. The resulting DeepONet can be written as
S(u)(y)=
DY∑
k=1
Ψk(α1,... ,αDX )φk(y), with αj := ℓj(u), j= 1,... , DX . (2.14)
Here, both the neural networks Ψ : RDX → RDY , with components Ψk = Ψk(· ; θ) , and φ : Ω →
Rp×DY with components φk = φk(· ; θ) , depend on parameters that are optimized during training of the
DeepONet.
Given an evaluation pointy∈ Ω the composition evy◦S, with the point-evaluation mapping evy(v)=
v(y), can again be written in the form
evy ◦ S(u)= Φy(Lu),
where L : X → RDX , Lu := (ℓ1(u),... ,ℓDX (u)) is linear, where
Φy(α) :=
DY∑
k=1
Ψk(α)φk(y),
and for fixed y the values φk(y)∈ Rp are just (constant) vectors. Thus, Φy is the composition of a neural
network Ψ with a linear read-out, and hence is itself a neural network. This shows that DeepONet is of
neural network-type.
The next lemma shows that the size can be related to the complexity of DeepONet: also in this case
cmplx(S) provides a lower bound on the total number of nonzero degrees of freedom of a DeepONet.
The detailed proof is provided in Appendix A.5.2.
LEMMA 2.20 (Complexity of DeepONet). Any DeepONet S = R◦ Ψ ◦ E, defined by a branch-net Ψ
and trunk-net φ, is of neural network-type, and
2(size(Ψ )+ size(φ))≥ cmplx(S).
♦
The following result is now an immediate consequence of Corollary 2.12 and the above lemma.
PROPOSITION 2.21 (Curse of parametric complexity for DeepONet). Assume the setting of Corollary 2.12.
Then, for any r ∈ N and δ> 0, there exists ϵ> 0 and an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 16 ===
662 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
S† : K⊂ X → Y, such that approximation to accuracy ϵ≤ ϵby a DeepONet Sϵ : X → Y
sup
u∈K
∥S†(u)− Sϵ(u)∥≤ϵ, (2.15)
with branch net Ψ and trunk net φ, implies complexity bound size(Ψ )+ size(φ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r);
here c, ϵ> 0 are constants depending only on α, δ and r. ♦
NOMAD. The linearity in the reconstruction in Y for both PCA-Net and DeepONet imposes a
fundamental limitation on their approximation capability ( Lanthaler et al., 2022; Seidman et al., 2022;
Lanthaler et al., 2023b). To overcome this limitation nonlinear extensions of DeepONet have recently
been proposed. The following NOMAD architecture ( Seidman et al., 2022) provides an example:
NOMAD (NOnlinear MAnifold Decoder) employs encoding by point evaluation at a fixed set of
sensor points, or more general linear functionals ℓ1,... ,ℓDX : X → R. The reconstruction R : RDY →
Y in the output space Y = Y(Ω; Rp) is defined via a neural network Q : RDY × Ω → Rp, which
depends jointly on encoded output coefficients in RDY and the evaluation point y ∈ Ω;a si nt h et w o
previous examples, Ψ : RDX → RDY is again a neural network. The resulting NOMAD mapping, for
u∈ X and y∈ Ω, is given by
S(u)(y)= Q(Ψ (α1,... ,αDX ), y), with αj := ℓj(u), (2.16)
for j= 1,... , DX . We note that the main difference between DeepONet and NOMAD is that the linear
expansion in (2.14) has been replaced by a nonlinear composition with the neural networkQ. Both neural
networks Ψ and Q are optimized during training.
Given evaluation point y ∈ Ω the composition ev y ◦ S with the point-evaluation can be written in
the form
evy ◦ S(u)= Φy(Lu),
where L : X → RDX , Lu := (ℓ1(u),... ,ℓDX (u)) is linear, and α ↦→ Φy(α) := Q(Ψk(α), y) defines a
neural network for fixed y. This shows that NOMAD is of neural network-type. Finally, the following
lemma provides an estimate on the complexity of NOMAD:
LEMMA 2.22 (Complexity of NOMAD). Any NOMAD operator S = R◦Ψ◦ E defined by a branch-net
Ψ and nonlinear reconstruction Q is of neural network-type, and
2(size(Ψ )+ size(Q))≥ cmplx(S). (2.17)
♦
The expression on the left-hand side of ( 2.17) represents the total number of nonzero degrees of
freedom in the NOMAD architecture and, as for PCA-Net and DeepONet, it is lower bounded by our
notion of complexity. For the proof, we refer to Appendix A.5.3.
The following result is now an immediate consequence of Corollary 2.12 and the above lemma.
PROPOSITION 2.23 (Curse of parametric complexity for NOMAD). Assume the setting of Corollary 2.12.
Then, for any r ∈ N and δ> 0, there exists ϵ> 0 and an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 17 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 663
S† : K ⊂ X → Y, such that approximation to accuracy ϵ ≤ ϵ by a NOMAD neural operator
Sϵ : X → Y
sup
u∈K
∥S†(u)− Sϵ(u)∥≤ϵ, (2.18)
with neural networks Ψ and Q, implies complexity bound size (Ψ )+ size(Q) ≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r);
here c, ϵ> 0 are constants depending only on α, δ and r. ♦
Discussion. For all examples above a general lower bound on the complexity cmplx (S) of operators of
neural network-type implies a lower bound on the total number of degrees of freedom of the particular
architecture. In particular, a lower bound on cmplx (S) gave a lower bound on the smallest possible
number of nonzero parameters that are needed to implement S in practice. This observation motivates
our nomenclature for the complexity.
We emphasize that our notion of complexity only relates to the size of the neural network at the core
of these architectures; by design, it does not take into account other factors, such as the additional com-
plexity associated with the practical evaluation of inner products in the PCA-Net architecture, evaluation
of linear encoding functionals of DeepONets or the numerical representation of an (optimal) output PCA
basis for PCA-Net or neural network basis for DeepONet. The important point is that the aforementioned
factors can only increase the overall complexity of any concrete implementation; correspondingly, our
proposed notion of cmplx (S), which neglects some of these additional contributions, can be used to
derive rigorous lower bounds on the overall complexity of any implementation.
REMARK 2.24. In passing, we point out similar approaches ( Hua & Lu , 2023; Zhang et al. , 2023;
Lanthaler et al., 2023b; Patel et al., 2024) to the PCA-Net, DeepONet and NOMAD architectures, which
share a closely related underlying structure to the examples given above. We fully expect that the curse
of parametric complexity applies to all of these architectures. ♦
In the next Subsection 2.5 we will show that, even for operator architectures that are not of neural
network-type according to the above definition, we may nevertheless be able to link them with an
associated operator of neural network-type. Specifically, we will show this for the FNO in Theorem2.27.
There, we will see that the size (number of tunable parameters) of the FNO can be linked to the
complexity of an associated operator of neural network-type. And hence lower bounds on the complexity
of operators of neural network-type imply corresponding lower bounds on the FNO.
2.5 The curse of (parametric) complexity for fourier neural operators
The definition of operators of neural network-typeintroduced in the previous subsection does not include
the FNO, a widely adopted neural operator architecture. However, in this subsection we show that a result
similar to Theorem 2.11, stated as Theorem 2.27, can be obtained for the FNO.
Due to intrinsic constraints on the domain on which FNO can be (readily) applied we will assume
that the spatial domain Ω = ∏d
j=1[aj, bj]⊂ Rd is rectangular. We recall that an FNO,
S : X(Ω; Rk)→ Y(Ω; Rp),
can be written as a composition, S = Q◦ LL◦···◦ L1◦ P, of a lifting layer P, hidden layers L1,... , LL
and an output layer Q. In the following text let us denote by V(Ω; Rdv ) a generic space of functions from
Ω to Rdv .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 18 ===
664 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
The nonlinear lifting layer
P : X(Ω; Rk)→ V(Ω; Rdv ), u(x)↦→ χ( x, u(x)),
is defined by a neural network χ : Ω× Rk → Rdv , depending jointly on the evaluation point x ∈ Ω
and the components of the input function u evaluated at x, namely u(x)∈ Rk. The dimension dv is a free
hyperparameter, and determines the number of ‘channels’ (or the ‘lifting dimension’).
Each hidden layer Lℓ, ℓ= 1,... , L, of an FNO is of the form
Lℓ : V(Ω; Rdv )→ V(Ω; Rdv ), v↦→ σ
(
Wℓv+ Kℓv+ bℓ
⎞
,
where σ is a nonlinear activation function applied componentwise, Wℓ ∈ Rdv×dv is a matrix, the bias
bℓ∈ V(Ω; Rdv ) is a function and Kℓ : V(Ω; Rdv )→ V(Ω; Rdv ) is a nonlocal operator defined in terms
of Fourier multipliers,
Kv(x)= F−1(ˆTk[Fv]k)(x),
where [Fv]k denotes the kth Fourier coefficient ofv for k∈ Zd,ˆTk ∈ Cdv×dv is a Fourier multiplier matrix
indexed by k and F−1 denotes the inverse Fourier transform. In practice, a Fourier cut-off kmax ∈ Z
is introduced, and only a finite number of Fourier modes 3 ∥k∥ℓ∞ ≤ kmax is retained. In particular,
the number of nonzero components of ˆT ={ ˆTk}k∈Zd is bounded by ∥ˆT∥0 ≤ d2
v(2kmax + 1)d.I nt h e
following text we will also assume that the bias functions bℓ are determined by their Fourier components
[ˆbℓ]k ∈ Cdv ,∥k∥ℓ∞ ≤ kmax.
Finally, the output layer
Q : V(Ω; Rdv )→ Y(Ω; Rp), v↦→ q(x, v(x)),
is defined in terms of a neural network q : Ω× Rdv → Rp, a joint function of the evaluation point x∈ Ω
and the components of the output v of the previous layer evaluated at x, namely v(x)∈ Rdv .
To define the size of an FNO we note that its tunable parameters are given by (i) the weights and
biases of the neural network χ defining the lifting layer R, (ii) the components of the matrices Wℓ ∈
Rdv×dv , (iii) the components of the Fourier multipliers ˆTk ∈ Cdv×dv for∥k∥ℓ∞ ≤ kmax, (iv) the Fourier
coefficients [ˆbℓ]k ∈ Cdv ,f o r∥k∥ℓ∞ ≤ kmax, and (v) the number of weights and biases of the neural
network q defining the output layer Q. Given an FNO S : X(Ω; Rk)→ Y(Ω; Rp) we define size(S) of
an FNO as the total number of nonzero parameters in this construction. We also follow the convention
that for a matrix (or vector) A with complex entries the number of parameters is defined as ∥A∥0 =
∥Re(A)∥0 +∥Im(A)∥0.
REMARK 2.25 (FNO approximation of functionals). If S† : X(Ω; Rk) → R is a (scalar-valued)
functional then we will again identify the output-space Y(Ω; Rp) with a space of constant functions. In
this case, it is natural to add an averaging operation after the last output layerQ : V(Ω; Rdv )→ Y(Ω; R),
3 Throughout this paper∥·∥ℓ∞ denotes the maximum norm on finite-dimensional Euclidean space.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 19 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 665
i.e., we replace Q by ˜Q : V(Ω; Rdv )→ R, given by
˜Q(v) := 1
|Ω|
∫
Ω
q(x, v(x)) dx. (2.19)
This does not introduce any additional degrees of freedom, and ensures that the output is constant. We
also note that ( 2.19) is a special case of a Fourier multiplier K, involving only the k= 0 Fourier mode.
♦
In the following text we will restrict attention to the approximation of functionals, taking into account
Remark 2.25. We first mention the following result, proved in Appendix A.6, which shows that FNOs
are not of neural network-type, in general:
LEMMA 2.26. Let σ be the ReLU activation function. Let T≃[0, 2π ] denote the 2π -periodic torus. The
FNO,
S : L2(T; R)→ R, S(u) :=
∫
Ω
σ( u(x)) dx,
is not of neural network-type. ♦
The fact that FNO is not of neural network-type is closely related to the fact that the Fourier
transforms at the core of the FNO mapping S : X(Ω; Rk)→ R cannot be computed exactly. In practice,
the FNO therefore needs to be discretized.
A simple discretization SN of S is readily obtained and commonly used in applications of FNOs. To
this end fix N ∈ N, and let xj1,...,jd ∈ Ω, j1,... , jd ∈{ 1,... , N} be a grid consisting of N equidistant
points in each coordinate direction. A numerical approximation SN : X(Ω; Rk)→ R of S is obtained
by replacing the Fourier transform F and its inverse F−1 in each hidden layer by the discrete Fourier
transform FN and its inverse F−1
N , computed on the equidistant grid. Similarly, the exact average ( 2.19)
is replaced by an average over the grid values. This ‘discretized’ FNO SN thus defines a mapping
SN : X(Ω; Rk)→ R, u↦→ SN(u),
which depends only on the grid values u(xj1,...,jd ) ∈ Rk of the input function u, for multi-indices
(j1, ... , jd)∈{ 1,... , N}d. In contrast to S the discretization SN is readily implemented in practice. We
expect that SN(u)≈ S(u) for sufficiently large N. Note also that size (SN)= size(S) by construction.
Given these preparatory remarks we can now state our result on the curse of parametric complexity
for FNOs, with proof in Appendix A7.
THEOREM 2.27. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a cube. Let K ⊂ X be a compact subset of a Banach space X =
X(Ω; Rk). Assume that K contains an infinite-dimensional hypercube Qα for some α> 1. Then, for any
r∈ N and δ> 0, there exists ϵ> 0 and an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional S† : K⊂ X → R,
such that approximation to accuracy ϵ≤ ϵby a discretized FNO SNϵ
ϵ ,
sup
u∈K
|S†(u)− SNϵ
ϵ (u)|≤ ϵ,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 20 ===
666 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
requires either (i) complexity bound size (SNϵ
ϵ ) ≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r), or (ii) discretization parameter
Nϵ≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r); here c, ϵ> 0 are constants depending only on α, δ and r. ♦
Proof (Sketch). The proof of Theorem 2.27 relies on the curse of parametric complexity for operators
of neural network-type in Theorem 2.11. The first step is to show that discrete FNOs are of neural
network-type. As a consequence, Theorem 2.11 implies a lower bound of the form cmplx (SNϵ
ϵ ) ≥
exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r). The main additional difficulty is that the discrete FNO is not a standard ReLU
neural network according to our definition, since it employs a very nonstandard architecture involving
convolution and Fourier transforms. Hence, more work is needed, in order to relate cmplx (SNϵ
ϵ ) to
size(SNϵ
ϵ ); while the complexity is the minimal number of parameters required to represent SNϵ
ϵ by an
ordinary ReLU network architecture, we recall that the size(SNϵ
ϵ ) is defined as the number of parameters
defining SNϵ
ϵ via the nonstandard FNO architecture. Our analysis leads to an upper bound of the form
cmplx(SNϵ
ϵ ) ≲ N2d
ϵ size(SNϵ
ϵ ). (2.20)
As a consequence of the exponential lower bound, cmplx (SNϵ
ϵ )≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r), inequality (2.20)
implies that either Nϵ or size(SNϵ
ϵ ) have to be exponentially large in ϵ−1, proving the claim. For the
detailed proof we refer to Appendix A7. □
REMARK 2.28. We would like to point out that the additional factor in ( 2.20), depending on Nϵ, is natural
in view of the fact that even a linear discretized FNO layer v ↦→ Wv, with matrix W ∈ Rdv×dv ,
actually corresponds to a mapping RNd
ϵ×dv → RNd
ϵ×dv , (v(xj1,...,jd )) ↦→ (Wv(x)j1,...,jd ), i.e., the matrix
multiplication should be viewed as being carried out in parallel at all Nd
ϵ grid points. Representing this
mapping by an ordinary matrix multiplication RNdϵ×dv → RNdϵ×dv requires Nd
ϵ∥W∥0 degrees of freedom,
and thus depends on Nϵ in addition to the number of FNO parameters ∥W∥0. ♦
REMARK 2.29. Theorem 2.27 shows that FNO suffers from a similar curse of complexity as do the variants
on DeepONet and PCA-Net covered by Theorem 2.11: approximation to accuracy ϵof general ( Cr-o r
Lipschitz-) operators requires either an exponential number of nonzero degree of freedom, or requires
exponential computational resources to evaluate even a single forward pass. We note the difference in
how the curse is expressed in Theorem
2.27 compared with Theorem 2.11; this is due to the fact that FNO
is not of neural network-type (see Lemma 2.26). Instead, as outlined in the proof sketch above, only upon
discretization does the FNO define an operator/functional of neural network type. The computational
complexity of this discretized FNO is determined by both the FNO coefficients and the discretization
parameter N. ♦
2.5.1 Discussion. To overcome the general curse of parametric complexity implied by Theorem 2.11
(and Theorem 2.27) efficient operator learning frameworks therefore have to leverage additional structure
present in the operators of interest, going beyond Cr- or Lipschitz-regularity. Previous work on
overcoming the curse of parametric complexity for operator learning has mostly focused on operator
holomorphy (Schwab & Zech, 2019 ; Herrmann et al., 2020; Lanthaler et al., 2022) and the emulation
of numerical methods ( Kovachki et al. , 2021 ; Deng et al. , 2022 ; Lanthaler et al. , 2022 )a st w ob a s i c
mechanisms for overcoming the curse of parametric complexity for specific operators of interest. An
abstract characterization of the entire class of operators that allow for efficient approximation by neural
operators would be very desirable. Unfortunately, this appears to be out of reach, at the current state of
analysis. Indeed, as far as the authors are aware, there does not even exist such a characterization for
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 21 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 667
any class of standard numerical methods, such as finite difference, finite element or spectral, viewed as
operator approximators.
The second contribution of this work is to expose additional structure, different from holomorphy
and emulation, that can be leveraged by neural operators. In particular, in the remainder of this paper
we identify such structure in the HJ equations, and propose a neural operator framework that can build
on this structure to provably overcome the curse of parametric complexity in learning the associated
solution operator.
3. The HJ equation
In the previous section we demonstrate that, generically, a scaling-limit of the curse of dimensionality
is to be expected in operator approximation, if only Cr− regularity of the map is assumed. However, we
also outlined in the introduction the many cases where specific structure can be exploited to overcome
this curse. In the remainder of the paper we show how the curse can be removed for HJ equations. To this
end we start, in this section, by setting up the theoretical framework for operator learning in this context.
We are interested in deriving error and complexity estimates for the approximation of the solution
operator S†
t : Cr
per(Ω) → Cr
per(Ω) associated with the following HJ PDE:
{∂tu+ H(q,∇qu)= 0,(x, t)∈ Ω× (0, T],
u(t= 0)= u0,(x, t)∈ Ω×{ 0}.
(HJ)
To simplify our analysis we consider only the case of a domain Ω = [0, 2π ]d with periodic boundary
conditions (so that we may identify Ω with Td). We denote byCr
per(Ω) the space of r-times continuously
differentiable real-valued functions with 2π -periodic derivatives, with norm
∥u∥Cr(Ω) := sup
|α|≤r
sup
x∈Ω
|Dα u(x)|.
By slight abuse of notation we will similarly denote byu(q, t)∈ Cr
per(Ω×[0, T]) and H(q, p)∈ Cr
per(Ω×
Rd) functions that have Cr regularity in all variables, and that are periodic in the first variable q∈ Ω,s o
that in particular,
q↦→ u(q, t) and q↦→ H(q, p),
belong to Cr
per(Ω),f o rf i x e dp∈ Rd or t∈ [0, T].
In equation ( HJ) u : Ω × [0, T] → R, (q, t) ↦→ u(q, t) is a function, depending on the spatial
variable q∈ Ω and on time t≥ 0. We will restrict attention to problems for which a classical solution
u ∈ Cr
per(Ω× [0, T]), r ≥ 2, exists. In this setting the initial value problem ( HJ) can be solved by the
method of characteristics and a unique solution may be proved to exist for some T = T(u0)> 0. We
may then define solution operator S†
t with property u(·, t) = S†
t (u0); the maximal time T of existence
will, in general, depend on the input u0 to St. The next two subsections describe, respectively, the method
of characteristics and the existence of the solution operator on a time-interval t ∈ [0, T], for all initial
data from compact F in Cr
per(Ω),f o r r ≥ 2. Thus, we define {S†
t : F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω) → Cr
per(Ω)} for all
t∈ [0, T], T = T(F) sufficiently small.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 22 ===
668 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
We recall that throughout this paper, use of a superscript † denotes an object defined through
construction of an exact solution of ( HJ), or objects used in the construction of the solution; identical
notation without a superscript † denotes an approximation of that object.
3.1 Method of characteristics for (HJ).
We briefly summarize this methodology; for more details see ( Evans, 2010, section 3.3). Consider the
following Hamiltonian system for t↦→ (q(t), p(t))∈ Ω× Rd defined by
{˙q=∇ pH(q, p), q(0)= q0,
˙p=−∇ qH(q, p), p(0)= p0,
(3.1a)
p0 =∇ qu0(q0). (3.1b)
If the solution u(q, t) of ( HJ) is twice continuously differentiable then u can be evaluated by solving
the ordinary differential equation (ODE) ( 3.1a) with the specific parameterized initial conditions ( 3.1b).
Given these trajectories and t ≥ 0, the values u(q(t), t) can be computed in terms of the ‘action’ along
this trajectory:
u(q(t), t)= u0(q0)+
∫t
0
L(q(t), p(t)) dτ , (3.2)
where L : Ω× Rd → R is the Lagrangian associated with H, i.e.,
L(q, p) := p·∇ pH(q, p)− H(q, p). (3.3)
Equivalently, the solution z(t)= u(q(t), t) can be expressed in terms of the solution of the following
system of ODEs, t↦→ (q(t), p(t), z(t)):
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪
⎩
˙q=∇
pH(q, p), q(0)= q0,
˙p=−∇ qH(q, p), p(0)= p0,
˙z= L(q, p), z(0)= z0.
(3.4a)
p0 =∇ qu0(q0), z0 = u0(q0). (3.4b)
The system of ODEs ( 3.4) is defined on Ω× Rd× R, with a 2π -periodic spatial domain Ω = [0, 2π ]d.
It can be shown that
p(t)≡∇ qu(q(t), t),f o r t≥ 0, (3.5)
tracks the evolution of the gradient of u along this trajectory. To ensure the existence of solutions to
(3.1), i.e., to avoid trajectories escaping to infinity, we make the following assumption on H, in which
|·| denotes the Euclidean distance on Rd:
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 23 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 669
ASSUMPTION 3.1 (Growth at Infinity). There exists LH > 0, such that
sup
q∈Ω
{
−p·∇ qH(q, p)
}
≤ LH(1+| p|2), (3.6)
for all p∈ Rd. ♦
In the following text we will denote by
{
Ψ †
t : Ω× Rd × R→ Ω× Rd × R,
(q0, p0, z0)↦→ (q(t), p(t), z(t)),
(3.7)
the semigroup (flow map) generated by the system of ODEs ( 3.4a); existence of this semigroup, and
hence of the solution operator S†
t , is the topic of the next subsection.
3.2 Short-time existence of C r-solutions
The goal of this section is to show that for any r≥ 2, and for any compact subset F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω), there
exists a maximal T∗ = T∗(F)> 0, such that for any u0 ∈ F there exists a solution u : Ω× [0, T∗)→ R
of (HJ), with property q↦→ u(q, t) belongs to Cr
per(Ω) for all t∈ [0, T∗). Thus, we may take any T < T∗
in (HJ), for data in F. Our proof of this fact relies on the Banach space version of the implicit function
theorem; see Appendix B, Theorem B1, for a precise statement.
In the following text, given t ≥ 0 and given initial values (q0, p0)∈ Ω× Rd, we define qt(q0, p0),
pt(q0, p0) as the spatial- and momenta-components of the solution of the Hamiltonian ODE ( 3.1a),
respectively; i.e., the solution of ( 3.1a) is given by t ↦→ (qt(q0, p0), pt(q0, p0)) for any initial data
(q0, p0)∈ Ω× Rd.
PROPOSITION 3.2 (Short-time existence of classical solutions). Let Assumption 3.1 hold, let r ≥ 2 and
assume that the Hamiltonian H ∈ Cr+1
per (Ω× Rd). Then, for any compact subset F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω), there
exists T∗ = T∗(F)> 0 such that for any u0 ∈ F there exists a classical solution u ∈ Cr
per(Ω ×
[0, T∗)) of the Hamilton–Jacobi equation ( HJ). Furthermore, for any T < T∗, there exists a constant
C= C(T, r, F, H)> 0 such that sup t∈[0,T]∥u(· , t)∥Cr ≤ C. ♦
The proof, which may be found in Appendix B, uses the following two lemmas, also proved in
Appendix B. The first result shows that, under Assumption3.1, the semigroupΨ †
t in (3.7) is well defined,
globally in time.
LEMMA 3.3. Let H ∈ Cr
per(Ω× Rd) for r ≥ 1. Let Assumption 3.1 hold. Then, the mapping Ψ †
t given
by (3.7) exists for any t≥ 0 and t↦→ Ψ †
t defines a semigroup. In particular, for any (q0, p0)∈ Ω× Rd,
there exists a solution t↦→ (q(t), p(t)) of the ODE system ( 3.1a) with initial data q(0)= q0, p(0)= p0,
for all t≥ 0. ♦
The following result will be used to show that the method of characteristics can be used to construct
solutions, at least over a sufficiently short time-interval.
LEMMA 3.4. Let Assumption 3.1 hold, let r≥ 2 and assume that the Hamiltonian H ∈ Cr+1
per (Ω× Rd).
Let F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω) be compact. Then, there exists a (maximal) time T∗ = T∗(F)> 0, such that for all
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 24 ===
670 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
u0 ∈ F,t h espatial characteristic mapping
Φ†
t (· ; u0) : Ω → Ω, q0 ↦→ qt
(
q0,∇qu0(q0)
⎞
,
defined by (3.1) on the periodic domain Ω = [0, 2π ]d,i sa Cr−1-diffeomorphism for any t∈ [0, T∗). ♦
Note that the map Φ†
t (· ; u0) is defined by the semigroup Ψ †
t for (q, p, z); however it only requires
solution of the Hamiltonian system (3.1)f o r(q, p). In contrast to the flowmapΨ †
t the spatial characteristic
map Φ†
t (· ; u0) is in general only invertible over a sufficiently short time-interval, leading to a correspond-
ing short-time existence result for the solution operator S†
t associated with ( HJ) in Proposition 3.2.
3.3 Limitations of the setting considered in this work
In this paper we study the curse of parametric complexity for operator learning, and discuss settings
where it can be overcome. The primary role of our study of HJ equations is to highlight a setting
where operator learning does not suffer from this curse. However, our analysis is restricted to the
setting of smooth solutions and nonintersecting characteristics. We close this section on HJ equations by
highlighting this important limitation of this work, and mention a possible extension.
The main limitation of this work is the assumption that classical solutions of ( HJ) exist. Indeed, it
is well known, e.g., Albano & Cannarsa (2002) ; Albano et al. (2020), that classical solutions of the HJ
equations can develop singularities in finite time due to the potential crossing of the spatial characteristics
q(t) emanating from different points; indeed, if two spatial characteristics emanating fromq0 and q′
0 cross
in finite time then (3.2) does not lead to a well-defined function u(q, t), and the method of characteristics
breaks down. Thus, our existence theorem is generally restricted to a finite time interval [0, T∗].
In certain special cases the crossing of characteristics is ruled out, and classical solutions exist for
all time, i.e., with T∗ =∞ . One such example is the advection equation with velocity field v(q), and
corresponding Hamiltonian H(q,∇qu)= v(q)·∇qu, for which the complexity of operator approximation
is studied computationally in de Hoop et al. (2022).
Finding more general conditions for the existence of classical solutions is a delicate question, which
is discussed in Barron et al. (1999); under certain convexity assumptions on the Hamiltonian it is possible
to relate the existence of a classical solution of ( HJ) to its time-reversibility. For example, it is shown
in ( Barron et al. , 1999 , theorem 2.5) that if H(q, p) is (i) strictly convex and superlinear in p, and
(ii) Lipschitz in q, and u(x, t) is a locally Lipschitz continuous (viscosity) solution of ( HJ) both forward
and backward in time then u must be smooth. Under certain technical assumptions on the convexity of
H and the initial data u(t= 0) it can in fact be shown ( Barron et al., 1999) that a forward solution u(x, t)
and a backward solution w(x, t) of ( HJ) must be equal everywhere, provided that they coincide at the
endpoints, i.e., u(x, T)= w(x, T) and u(x,0)= w(x,0)⇒ u≡ w and u, w∈ C1([0, T]× Rd).
The existence of classical characteristics will play a fundamental role in the neural network-based
approach to be developed in the next section. An interesting question for future work is whether classical
characteristics could be replaced by a suitable notion of generalized characteristics, as studied in
Albano
& Cannarsa (2002); Albano et al. (2020). The main challenge in such an extension is the nonuniqueness
of generalized characteristics; it is not immediately clear whether a neural network-based approach can
coherently approximate such generalized characteristics when there is ap r i o r ino flow map (q
t, pt) =
φt(q0, p0) in the classical sense. In contrast, if such a flow map exists then this represents sufficient
structure to beat the curse of parametric complexity, as shown in the following section.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 25 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 671
4. HJ neural operator: HJ-Net
In this section we will describe an operator learning framework to approximate the solution operator
S†
t defined by ( HJ) for initial data u0 ∈ Cr
per(Ω) with r ≥ 2. The main motivation for our choice of
framework is the observation that the flow map Ψ †
t associated with the system of ODEs ( 3.4a) can be
computed independently of the underlying solution u . Hence, an operator learning framework for ( HJ)
can be constructed based on a suitable approximation Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t , where Ψt : Ω× Rd× R→ Ω× Rd× R
is a neural network approximation of the flow Ψ †
t . Given such Ψt, and upon fixing evaluation points
{qj
0}N
j=1 ⊂ Ω, we propose to approximate the forward operator S†
t of the Hamilton–Jacobi equation (HJ)
by St, using the following three steps:
Step (a) encode the initial data u0 ∈ Cr
per(Ω) by evaluating it at the points qj
0:
E : Cr
per(Ω) → [Ω× Rd × R]N ,
u0 ↦→{ (qj
0, pj
0, zj
0)}N
j=1,
with (qj
0, pj
0, zj
0) := (qj
0,∇qu0(qj
0), u0(qj
0));
Step (b) for each j = 1,... , N, apply the approximate flow Ψt : Ω× Rd × R to the encoded data,
resulting in a map
Ψ N
t :[ Ω× Rd × R]N → [Ω× Rd × R]N ,
{(qj
0, pj
0, zj
0)}N
j=1 ↦→{ (qj
t, pj
t, zj
t)}N
j=1,
where (qj
t, pj
t, zj
t) := Ψt(qj
0, pj
0, zj
0),f o r j= 1,... , N;
Step (c) approximate the underlying solution at a fixed time t ∈ [0, T], for T sufficiently small, by
interpolating the data (input/output pairs) {(qj
t, zj
t)}N
j=1, leading to a reconstruction map:
R :[ Ω× R]N → Cr(Ω),
{(qj
t, zj
t)}↦→ sz,Q.
If we let P denote the projection map, which takes [ Ω × Rd × R]N to [Ω × R]N , then, for fixed
T sufficiently small, we have defined an approximation of S†
t : Cr
per(Ω) → Cr
per(Ω), denoted St :
Cr
per(Ω) → Cr(Ω), and defined by
St = R◦ P◦ Ψ N
t ◦ E. (4.1)
It is a consequence of Proposition 3.2 that our approximation St is well defined for all inputs u0 from
compact subset F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω), r≥ 2, in some interval t∈ [0, T], for T sufficiently small. However, the
resulting approximation does not obey the semigroup property with respect to t and should be interpreted
as holding for a fixedt∈ [0, T], T sufficiently small. Furthermore, iterating the map obtained for any such
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 26 ===
672 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
fixed t is not in general possible unless St maps F into itself. The requirement that S†
t maps F into itself
would also be required to prove the existence of a semigroup for ( HJ); for our operator approximator St
we would additionally need to ensure periodicity of the reconstruction step, something we do not address
in this paper.
If the underlying solution u(q, t) of ( HJ)e x i s t su pt ot i m et, and if it is C2 then the method of
characteristics can be applied, and the above procedure would reproduce the underlying solution, in
the absence of approximation errors in Steps (b) and (c), i.e., in the absence of approximation errors of
the Hamiltonian flow Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t , and in the absence of reconstruction errors. We will study the effect of
approximating Step (b) by use of an ReLU neural network approximation of the flow Ψ †
t and by use
of a moving least squares interpolation for Step (c). In the following two subsections we define these
two approximation steps, noting that doing so leads to a complete specification of St. This complete
specification is summarized in the final Subsection 4.3.
4.1 Step (b) ReLU network
We seek an approximation Ψt to Ψ †
t in the form of an ReLU neural network ( 2.1), as summarized in
Section 2.1.1, with input and output dimensions DX = DY = 2d+ 1, and taking the concatenated input
x := (q0, p0, z0) ∈ Ω× Rd × R to its image in Rd × Rd × R.W eu s e2 π -periodicity to identify the
output in the first d components (the spatial variable q) with a unique element in Ω = [0, 2π ]d. With
slight abuse of notation this results in a well-defined mapping
Ψt : Ω× Rd × R→ Ω× Rd × R, (q0, p0, z0)→ Ψt(q0, p0, z0).
Let μ denote a probability measure on Ω× Rd× R. We would like to choose θ to minimize the loss
function
L(θ) = E(q,p,z)∼μ∥Ψt(q, p, z; θ)− Ψ †
t (q, p, z)∥.
In practice, we achieve this by an empirical approximation ofμ, based on N i.i.d. samples, and numerical
simulation to approximate the evaluation of Ψ †
t (· ) on these samples. The resulting approximate
empirical loss can be approximately minimized by stochastic gradient descent (Robbins & Monro, 1951;
Goodfellow et al., 2016), for example.
4.2 Step (c) moving least squares
In this section we define the interpolation mapping R :{qj
t, zj
t}N
j=1 ↦→ u(· , t), employing reconstruction
by moving least squares ( Wendland, 2004). In general, given a function f † : Ω → R,h e r ea s s u m e dt o
be defined on the domain Ω = [0, 2π ]d, and given a set of (scattered) data {qj, zj}N
j=1, where zj = f †(qj)
for Q={ q1, ... , qN}⊂ Ω, the method of moving least squares produces an approximation fz,Q ≈ f †,
which is given by the following minimization ( Wendland, 2004, definition 4.1):
fz,Q,n(q)= min
⎧
⎨
⎩
N∑
j=1
[
zj − P(qj)
]2
φδ(q− qj)
⏐⏐
⏐⏐⏐
⏐
P∈ π
n
⎫
⎬
⎭. (4.2)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 27 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 673
Here, πn denotes the space of polynomials of degree n, and φδ(q)= φ(q/δ) is a compactly supported,
non-negative weight function. In the following text we will choose n := r− 1, where r is the degree of
smoothness of f † ∈ Cr(Ω). We will assume φ(· ) to be smooth, supported in the unit ball B1(0), and
positive on the ball B1/2(0) with radius 1/2.
The approximation error incurred by moving least squares can be estimated in the L∞-norm, in terms
of suitable measures of the ‘density’ of the scattered data points qj, and the smoothness of the underlying
function f † (Wendland, 2004). The relevant notions are defined next, in which|·| denotes the Euclidean
distance on Ω ⊂ Rd.
DEFINITION 4.1. The fill distance of a set of pointsQ={ q1,... , qN}⊂ Ω for a bounded domainΩ ⊂ Rd
is defined to be
hQ,Ω := sup
q∈Ω
min
j=1,...,N
|q− qj|.
The separation distance of Q is defined by
ρQ := 1
2 min
k̸=j
|qk − qj|.
As e tQ of points in Ω is said to be quasi-uniform with respect to κ ≥ 1, if
ρQ ≤ hQ,Ω ≤ κρQ.
♦
Combining the approximation error of moving least squares with a stability result for moving least
squares, with respect to the input data, leads to the error estimate that we require to estimate the error in
our proposed HJ-Net. Proof of the following may be found in Appendix C. The statement involves both
the input data set Q and a set Q†, which Q is supposed to approximate, together with their respective
fill-distances and separation distances.
PROPOSITION 4.2 (Error stability). Let Ω = [0, 2π ]d ⊂ Rd and consider function f † ∈ Cr(Ω),f o rs o m e
fixed regularity parameter r≥ 2. Assume that Q† ={ qj,†}N
j=1 is quasi-uniform with respect to κ ≥ 1. Let
{qj, zj}N
j=1 be approximate interpolation data, and define Q :={ qj}N
j=1, where, for some ρ ∈ (0, 1
2ρQ† )
and ϵ> 0, we have
|qj − qj,†| <ρ , |zj − f(qj,†)| <ϵ .
Using this approximate interpolation data let fz,Q := fz,Q,n be obtained by moving least squares ( 4.2)
with n := r− 1. Then, there exist constants h0,γ , C > 0, depending only on d, r and κ ≥ 1, such that,
for hQ,Ω ≤ h0 and moving least squares scale parameter δ := γ hQ,Ω ,w eh a v e
∥f † − fz,Q∥L∞ ≤ C
(
∥f †∥Cr hr
Q†,Ω + ϵ+∥f †∥C1 ρ
⎞
. (4.3)
♦
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 28 ===
674 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
Algorithm 1 Pruning
Input: Interpolation points Q={ qj}N
j=1.
Output: Pruned interpolation points Q′={ qjk}m
k=1 with fill distance hQ′,Ω ≤ 3hQ,Ω , and Q′is quasi-
uniform for κ = 3, i.e.,
ρQ′≤ hQ′,Ω ≤ 3ρQ′
procedure
Set m← 1, j1 ← 1 and Q′←{ q1}.
while m < N do
Given Q′={ qj1 ,... , qjm}⊂ Q, does there exist qk ∈ Q, such that
Bh(qk)∩
m⋃
ℓ=1
Bh(qjℓ)=∅ ?
if Ye sthen
Set jm+1 ← k,
Set Q′← Q′∪{ qk},
Set m← m+ 1.
else
Terminate the algorithm.
end if
end while
end procedure
REMARK 4.3. The constants C and γ in the previous proposition can be computed explicitly ( Wendland,
2004, see theorem 3.14 and corollary 4.8). ♦
Proposition 4.2 reveals two sources of error in the reconstruction by moving least squares: the first
term on the right-hand side of ( 4.3) is the error due to the discretization by a finite number of evaluation
points qj. This error persists even in a perfect data setting, i.e., when qj = qj,† and zj = f †(qj,†).T h el a s t
two terms in ( 4.3) reflect the fact that in our intended application to HJ-Net the evaluation points qj and
the function values zj are only given approximately, via the approximate flow map Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t , introducing
additional error sources.
The proof of Proposition 4.2 relies crucially on the fact that the set of evaluation points Q={ qj}N
j=1
is quasi-uniform. In our application to HJ-Net these points are obtained as the image of (qj
0, pj
0, zj
0) :=
(qj
0,∇qu0(qj
0), u0(qj
0)) under the approximate flow Ψt. In particular, they depend on u0 and we cannot
ensure any ap r i o r icontrol on the separation distance ρQ. Our proposed reconstruction R therefore
involves the pruning step, stated as Algorithm 1. Lemma C.3 in Appendix C shows that Algorithm 1
produces a quasi-uniform set Q′⊂ Q with the desired properties asserted above.
Given the interpolation by moving least squares and the pruning algorithm we finally define the
reconstruction map R : {(qj
t, zj
t)}N
j=1 ↦→ fz,Q. In our application the interpolation data are connected
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 29 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 675
Algorithm 2 Reconstruction R
(1) Given approximate interpolation data {qj
t, zj
t}N
j=1 at data points Q={ q1
t ,... , qN
t }, determine a quasi-
uniform subset Q′={ qjk
t }m
k=1 ⊂ Q by Algorithm 1.
(2) Given a degree of smoothness r ∈ N≥2, define fz,Q := fz,Q,n=r−1 as the moving least squares
interpolant (4.2), based on the (pruned) interpolation data {(qjk
t , zjk
t )}m
k=1 with δ = γ hQ′,Ω , and γ
the constant in Proposition 4.2.
with a ground truth map f † ∈ Cr(Ω). The following algorithm assumes knowledge of the degree of
smoothness r:
4.3 Summary of HJ-Net
Thus, in the final definition of HJ-Net given in equation ( 4.1) we recall that E denotes the encoder
mapping
u0 ↦→ E(u0) :=
(
qj
0,∇u0(qj
0), u0(qj
0)
⎞
.
The mapping
(
qj
0, pj
0, zj
0
⎞
↦→
(
qj
t, pj
t, zj
t
⎞
:= Ψt
(
qj
0, pj
0, zj
0; θ
⎞
approximates the flow Ψt for each of the triples, (qj
0, pj
0, zj
0), j = 1,... , N, and θ is trained from
data to minimize an approximate empirical loss. And, finally, the reconstruction R is obtained by
applying the pruned moving least squares Algorithm 2 to the data {qj
t, pj
t, zj
t}N
j=1 at scattered data points
Qt ={ q1
t , ... , qN
t } and with corresponding values zt = (z1
t ,... , zN
t ), to approximate the output u(q, t)≈
fzt,Qt (q).
5. Error estimates and complexity
Subsection 5.1 contains statement of the main theorem concerning the computational complexity of
HJ-Net, and the high level structure of the proof. The theorem demonstrates that the curse of parametric
complexity is overcome in this problem in the sense that the cost to achieve a given error, as measured by
the size of the parameterization, grows only algebraically with the inverse of the error. In Subsections
5.2
and 5.3 we provide a detailed discussion of the approximation of the Hamiltonian flow and the moving
last squares algorithm, which, together, lead to the proof of Theorem 5.1. Proofs of the results stated in
those two subsections are given in the appendix.
5.1 HJ-Net beats the curse of parametric complexity
THEOREM 5.1 (HJ-Net approximation estimate). Consider equation ( HJ) on periodic domain Ω =
[0, 2π ]d, with Cr
per initial data and Hamiltonian H ∈ Cr+1
per , where r ≥ 2. Assume that H satisfies the
no-blowup Assumption 3.1.L e t F ⊂ Cr
per be a compact set of initial data, and let T < T∗(F), where
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 30 ===
676 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
T∗(F) is given by Proposition 3.2. Then, there is constant C = C(T, d, r, H, F)> 0, such that for any
ϵ> 0 and t ∈ [0, T] there exists a set of points Qϵ ={ q1,... , qN}, optimal parameter θϵ and neural
network Ψt(· )= Ψt(· ; θϵ) such that the corresponding HJ-Net approximation given by (4.1), with Steps
(b) and (c) defined in Subsections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively, satisfies
sup
u0∈F
∥St(u0)− S†
t (u0)∥L∞ ≤ ϵ.
Furthermore, we have the following complexity bounds: (i) the number N of encoding points Qϵ =
{qj}N
j=1 from Step (a) can be bounded by
N≤ Cϵ−d/r; (5.1)
and (ii) the neural network Ψt(· )= Ψt(· ; θϵ) from Step (b), Subsection 4.1, satisfies
depth(Ψt)≤ C log(ϵ−1),s i z e (Ψt)≤ Cϵ−(2d+1)/r log(ϵ−1). (5.2)
♦
Proof. We first note that, for any u0 ∈ F and T < T∗(F), Proposition 3.2 shows that the solution u
of ( HJ) can be computed by the method of characteristics up to time T. Thus, S†
t is well defined for
any t∈ [0, T]. We break the proof into three steps, relying on propositions established in the following
subsections, and then conclude in a final fourth step.
Step 1 (Neural network approximation). Let M be given by
M := 1∨ sup
u0∈F
sup
q∈Ω
∥∇u0(q)∥ℓ∞ ∨ sup
u0∈F
sup
q∈Ω
|u0(q)|,
where a∨ b denotes the maximum. By this choice of M we have∇u0(q)∈ [−M, M]d, u0(q)∈ [−M, M]
for all u0 ∈ F, q∈ Ω. By Proposition 5.4 there exists a constant β = β(d, LH , t)≥ 1, and a constant
C > 0, depending only on M, d, t, and the norm∥H∥Cr+1(Td×[−βM,βM]d), such that the Hamiltonian flow
map Ψ †
t (3.7) can be approximated by a neural network Ψt with
size(Ψt)≤ Cϵ−(2d+1)/r log(ϵ−1), depth (Ψt)≤ C log(ϵ−1),
and
sup
(q0,p0,z0)∈Ω×[−M,M]d×[−M,M]
⏐⏐
⏐Ψ
t(q0, p0, z0)− Ψ †
t (q0, p0, z0)
⏐⏐
⏐≤ ϵ. (5.3)
Step 2 (Choice of encoding points). Fix ρ> 0, to be determined below. Let Q := ρZd ∩ [0, 2π ]d
denote an equidistant grid on [0, 2 π ]d with grid spacing ρ. Enumerating the elements of Q we write
Q={ q1
0, ... , qN
0}, where we note that there exists a constant C1 = C1(d)> 0 depending only on d, such
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 31 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 677
that N≤ C1ρ−d; equivalently,
ρd
C1
≤ 1
N . (5.4)
For any u0 ∈ F let
Q†
u0 :=
{
qj,†
t
⏐⏐⏐qj,†
t = qt(qj
0, pj
0), qj
0 ∈ Qϵ, pj
0 =∇ qu0(qj
0)
}
(5.5)
be the set of image points under the characteristic mapping defined byu0. Since Q†
u0 ={ qj,†
t }N
j=1 is a set of
N points it follows from the definition of the fill distance thatN balls of radius hQ†
u0 ,Ω coverΩ = [0, 2π ]d.
A simple volume counting argument then implies that there exists a constant C0 = C0(d)> 0, such that
1/N≤ C0 hd
Q†
u0 ,Ω ; equivalently,
1
C0N ≤ hd
Q†
u0 ,Ω , ∀ u0 ∈ F. (5.6)
Given ϵfrom Step 1 we now choose ρ := (C0C1)1/dϵ1/r, so that by ( 5.4) and (5.6),
ϵd/r = 1
C0
ρd
C1
≤ 1
C0N ≤ hd
Q†
u0 ,Ω , ∀ u0 ∈ F.
We emphasize that C0, C1 depend only on d, and are independent of u0 ∈ F and ϵ.W eh a v et h u ss h o w n
that if Qϵ :={ q1,... , qN} is an enumeration of ρZd ∩ [0, 2π ]d with ρ := (C0C1)1/dϵ1/r then the fill
distance of the image points Q†
u0 under the characteristic mapping satisfies
ϵ≤ hr
Q†
u0 ,Ω , ∀ u0 ∈ F. (5.7)
In particular, this step defines our encoding points Qϵ.
Step 3 (Interpolation error estimate). Let Qϵ be the set of evaluation points determined in Step 2.
Since Qϵ is an equidistant grid with grid spacing proportional to ϵ1/r the fill distance of Qϵ is bounded
by hQϵ,Ω ≤ Cϵ1/r, where the constant C= C(d)≥ 1 depends only on d. By Proposition 5.7 there exists
a (possibly larger) constant C= C(d, t, H, F)≥ 1, such that for all u0 ∈ F the set of image points Q†
u0
under the characteristic mapping ( 5.5) has uniformly bounded fill distance
hQ†
u0 ,Ω ≤ Cϵ1/r, ∀ u0 ∈ F. (5.8)
Furthermore, taking into account ( 5.7) the upper bound ( 5.3)i m p l i e st h a t
sup
(q0,p0,z0)∈Td×[−M,M]d×[−M,M]
⏐⏐
⏐Ψ
t(q0, p0, z0)− Ψ †
t (q0, p0, z0)
⏐⏐
⏐≤ h
r
Q†
u0 ,Ω ,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 32 ===
678 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
for any u0 ∈ F. In turn, this shows that the approximate interpolation data (qj
t, zj
t)= P◦ Ψt(qj
0, pj
0, zj
0),
j= 1,... , N, obtained from the neural network approximation Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t by (orthogonal) projection P
onto the first and last components, satisfy
⏐⏐
⏐q
j
t − qj,†
t
⏐⏐
⏐≤ h
r
Q†
u0 ,Ω ,
⏐⏐
⏐z
j
t − u(qj,†
t , t)
⏐⏐
⏐≤ h
r
Q†
u0 ,Ω ,
where u(q, t) denotes the exact solution of the HJ PDE ( HJ) with initial data u0 ∈ F. By Proposition
5.6 there exists a constant C > 0, depending only on d and r, such that the pruned moving least squares
approximant fz,Qu0
obtained by Algorithm 2 with (approximate) data points Qu0 ={ q1
t ,... , qN
t } and
corresponding data values z={ z1
t ,... , zN
t } satisfies
∥u(· , t)− fz,Qu0
∥L∞(Ω) ≤ C
(
1+∥u(· , t)∥Cr(Ω)
⎞
hr
Q†
u0 ,Ω . (5.9)
Step 4 (Conclusion). By the short-time existence result of Proposition 3.2 there exists C =
C(H, F, t)> 0, such that ∥u(· , t)∥Cr(Ω) ≤ C for any solution u of the Hamilton–Jacobi equation
(HJ) with initial data u(· , t = 0) = u0 ∈ F. By definition of the HJ-Net approximation we have
St(u0)≡ fz,Qu0
and by definition of the solution operator S†
t (u0)≡ u(· , t). We thus conclude that
∥St(u0)− S†
t (u0)∥L∞
(5.9)
↓
≤ Chr
Q†
u0 ,Ω
(5.8)
↓
≤ Cϵ,
for a constant C = C(T, d, r, H, F)> 0, independent of ϵ. Since ϵ is arbitrary replacing ϵ by ϵ/C
throughout the above argument implies the claimed error and complexity estimate of Theorem 5.1. □
REMARK 5.2 (Nonuniform sampling). In practice, an input-function-dependent, nonuniform sampling
could improve the results of the moving least squares interpolant. This is especially relevant, given the
potentially rapid growth of second- and higher order derivatives along characteristics. However, this
would likely not lead to faster asymptotic convergence rates, motivating us to restrict attention to the
uniformly sampled setting for our analysis, for simplicity. ♦
REMARK 5.3 (Overall computational complexity of HJ-Net). The error and complexity estimate of
Theorem 5.1 implies that for moderate dimensions d, and for sufficiently smooth input functions u0 ∈
F ⊂ Cr
per, with r > 3d+1, the overall complexity of this approach scales at most linearly inϵ−1: Indeed,
the mapping of the data points(qj
0, pj
0, zj
0)↦→ (qj
t, pj
t, zj
t) for j= 1,... , N requires N forward-passes of the
neural network Ψt, which has O(ϵ−(2d+1)/r log(ϵ−1)) internal degrees of freedom. Since N= O(ϵ−d/r)
the computational complexity of this mapping is thus bounded by O(ϵ−(3d+1)/r log(ϵ−1)) = O(ϵ−1).
A naive implementation of the pruning algorithm requires at most O(N2) = O(ϵ−2d/r) = O(ϵ−1)
comparisons. The computational complexity of the reconstruction by the moving least squares method
with m ≤ N (pruned) interpolation points and with M ∼ ϵ
−d/r evaluation points can be bounded by
O(m+ M)= O(ϵ−d/r + M)= O(ϵ−1) (Wendland, 2004, last paragraph of chapter 4.2). In particular,
the overall complexity to obtain an ϵ-approximation of the output function St(u0)≈ S†
t (u0) at e.g., the
encoding points Qϵ (with M=| Qϵ|∼ ϵ−d/r) is at most linear in ϵ−1. ♦
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 33 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 679
Theorem 5.1 shows that for fixed d and r the proposed HJ-Net architecture can overcome the general
curse of parametric complexity in the operator approximation S ≈ S† implied by Theorem 2.11 even
though the underlying operator does not have higher than Cr-regularity. This is possible because HJ-Net
leverages additional structure inherent to the HJ PDE HJ (reflected in the method of characteristics), and
therefore does not rely solely on the Cr-smoothness of the underlying operator S†.
5.2 Approximation of Hamiltonian flow and quadrature map
In this subsection we quantify the complexity of ϵ-approximation by an ReLU network as defined in
Subsection 4.1.
Recall that Ψ †
t : Ω× Rd × R → Ω× Rd × R comprises solution of the Hamiltonian equations
(3.1) and quadrature ( 3.2), leading to ( 3.4). An approximation Ψt : Ω× Rd× R→ Ω× Rd× R of this
Hamiltonian flow map is provided the by the following proposition, proved in Appendix D.
PROPOSITION 5.4. Let Ω = [0, 2π ]d.L e tr≥ 2, and t > 0 be given, and assume that H∈ Cr+1
per (Ω× Rd)
satisfies the no-blowup Assumption 3.1 with constant LH > 0. Then, for any M≥ 1, there exist constants
β := (1+
√
d) exp(LH t) and C= C
(
∥H∥Cr+1(Ω×[−βM,βM]d), M, r, d, t
⎞
> 0, such that for all ϵ∈ (0, 1
2 ]
there is an ReLU neural network Ψt(· )= Ψt(· ; θϵ) satisfying
sup
(q0,p0,z0)∈Ω×[−M,M]d+1
⏐⏐
⏐Ψ
t(q0, p0, z0)− Ψ †
t (q0, p0, z0)
⏐⏐
⏐≤ ϵ, (5.10)
satisfying
size(Ψt)≤ Cϵ−(2d+1)/r log
(
ϵ−1
⎞
, depth (Ψt)≤ C log
(
ϵ−1
⎞
.
♦
REMARK 5.5. Using the results of Y arotsky & Zhevnerchuk (2020); Kohler & Langer (2021); Lu et al.
(2021a) one could in fact improve the size bound of Proposition 5.4 somewhat: neglecting logarithmic
terms in ϵ−1 it can be shown that a neural network with size (Ψt) ≲ ϵ−(d+1/2)/r suffices. However,
this comes at the expense of substantially increasing the depth from a logarithmic scaling depth (Ψt) ≲
log(ϵ−1), to an algebraic scaling depth (Ψt) ≲ ϵ−(d+1/2)/r. ♦
5.3 Moving least squares reconstruction error
In this subsection we discuss error estimates for the reconstruction by moving least squares, based on
imperfect input–output pairs, as defined in Subsection 4.2.
We recall that the reconstruction R in the HJ-Net approximation is obtained by applying the pruned
moving least squares Algorithm 2 to the data {qj
t, zj
t}N
j=1, where (qj
t, pj
t, zj
t) are obtained as (qj
t, pj
t, zj
t) =
Ψt(qj
0, pj
0, zj
0) with fixed evaluation points {qj
0}N
j=1 ⊂ Ω, and where pj
0 :=∇ qu0(qj
0), zj
0 := u0(qj
0)
are determined in terms of a given input function u0, so that zj
t ≈ u(qj
t, t) is an approximation of the
corresponding solution u(· , t) at time t.
In the following text we first derive an error estimate in terms of the fill distance of Qt ={ qj
t}N
j=1,i n
Proposition 5.6. Subsequently, in Proposition 5.7, we provide a bound on the fill distance hQt ,Ω at time
t in terms of the fill distance hQ,Ω at time 0. Proof of both propositions can be found in Appendix D.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 34 ===
680 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
PROPOSITION 5.6. Let Ω = [0, 2π ]d ⊂ Rd and fix a regularity parameter r ≥ 2. There exist constants
h0, C > 0 such that the following holds: assume that Q† ={ q1,†,... , qN,†}⊂ Ω is a set of N evaluation
points with fill distance hQ†,Ω ≤ h0. Then, for any 2π -periodic function f † ∈ Cr
per(Ω), and approximate
input–output data{(qj, zj)}N
j=1, such that
|qj − qj,†|≤ hr
Q†,Ω , |zj − f †(qj,†)|≤ hr
Q†,Ω ,
the pruned moving least squares approximant fz,Q := fz,Q,n=r−1 of Algorithm 2 with interpolation data
points Q={ q1, ... , qN} and data values z={ z1,... , zN} satisfies
∥f † − fz,Q∥L∞(Ω) ≤ C
(
1+∥f †∥Cr(Ω)
⎞
hr
Q†,Ω .
♦
In contrast to Proposition 4.2, Proposition 5.6 includes the pruning step in the reconstruction, and
does not assume quasi-uniformity of either the underlying exact point distributionQ†, or the approximate
point distribution Q. To obtain a bound on the reconstruction error we can combine the preservation of
Cr-regularity implied by the short-time existence Proposition 3.2, with the following:
PROPOSITION 5.7. Let Ω = [0, 2π ]d,l e t r ≥ 2 and assume that the Hamiltonian H ∈ Cr+1
per (Ω× Rd) is
periodic in q and satisfies Assumption 3.1 with constant LH > 0. Let F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω) be a compact subset
and fix t < T∗. Then, there exists a constant C= C(H, F, LH , t)> 0, such that for any set of evaluation
points Q={ qj
0}N
j=1 ⊂ Ω, and for any u0 ∈ F the image points
Q†
u0 :=
{
qj
t
⏐⏐
⏐q
j
t = Φ†
t,u0(qj
0), j= 1,... , N
}
⊂ Ω,
under the spatial characteristic mapping Φ†
t,u0 : q0 ↦→ qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)), satisfy the following uniform
bound on the fill distance:
hQ†
u0 ,Ω ≤ ChQ,Ω .
♦
6. Conclusions
The first contribution of this work is to study the curse of dimensionality in the context of operator
learning, here interpreted in terms of the infinite-dimensional nature of the input space. We state a
theorem that, for the first time, establishes a general form of the curse of parametric complexity, a
natural scaling limit of the CoD in high-dimensional approximation, characterized by lower bounds
that are exponential in the desired error. The theorem demonstrates that in general it is not possible to
obtain complexity estimates, for the size of the approximating neural operator, that grow algebraically
with inverse error unless specific structure in the underlying operator is leveraged; in particular, we
prove that this additional structure has to go beyond C
r- or Lipschitz-regularity. This considerably
generalizes and strengthens earlier work on the curse of parametric complexity in Lanthaler (2023) ,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 35 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 681
where a mild form of this curse had been identified for PCA-Net. As shown in this work our result
applies to many proposed operator learning architectures including PCA-Net, the FNO and DeepONet,
and recent nonlinear extensions thereof. The lower complexity bound in this work is obtained for
neural operator architectures based on standard feedforward ReLU neural networks, and could likely
be extended to feedforward architectures employing piecewise polynomial activations. It is of note that
algebraic complexity bounds, which seemingly overcome the curse of parametric complexity of this
work, have recently been derived for the approximation of Lipschitz operators (
Schwab et al. , 2023 );
these results build on nonstandard neural network architectures with either superexpressive activation
functions, or nonstandard connectivity, and therefore do not contradict our results. In fact, a recent follow-
up ( Lanthaler, 2024 ) to this work sheds further light on this question from an information-theoretic
perspective, resulting in a statement of the curse of parametric complexity, which is independent of the
activation function.
The second contribution of this paper is to present an operator learning framework for HJ equations,
and to provide a complexity analysis demonstrating that the methodology is able to tame the curse of
parametric complexity for these PDE. We present the ideas in a simple setting, and there are numerous
avenues for future investigation. For example, as pointed out in Subsection
3.3, one main limitation
of the proposed approach based on characteristics is that we can only consider finite time intervals on
which classical solutions of the HJ equations exist. As already pointed out, there it would be of interest
to extend the methodology to viscosity solutions, after the potential formation of singularities. It would
also be of interest to combine our work with the work on CoD with respect to dimension of Euclidean
space, cited in Section
1. Furthermore, in practice we recommend learning the Hamiltonian flow, which
underlies the method of characteristics for the HJ equation, using symplectic neural networks ( Jin et al.,
2020). However, the analysis of these neural networks is not yet developed to the extent needed for
our complexity analysis in this paper, which builds on the work in ( Y arotsky, 2017). Extending the
analysis of symplectic neural networks, and using this extension to analyse generalizations of HJ-Net as
defined here are interesting directions for future study. Finally, we note that it is of interest to iterate
the learned operator. In order to do this we would need to generalize the error estimates to the C1
topology. This could be achieved either by interpolation between higher order Cs bounds of the proposed
methodology for s > 1 combined with the existing error analysis, or by using the gradient variablep in the
interpolation.
Funding
Swiss National Science Foundation (P500PT-206737 to S.L.); Department of Defense V annevar Bush
Faculty Fellowship.
REFERENCES
ALBANO,P .& CANNARSA,P .(2002) Propagation of singularities for solutions of nonlinear first order partial differential
equations. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal., 162, 1–23.
ALBANO,P ., CANNARSA,P . & SINESTRARI,C . (2020) Generation of singularities from the initial datum for Hamilton–
Jacobi equations. J. Differ . Equations, 268, 1412–1426.
ANTHONY,M . & BARTLETT,P .L . (1999) Neural Network Learning: Theoretical F oundations. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
BACH,F . (2017) Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. J .M a c h .L e a r n .R e s ., 18, 1–53.
BARRON,A .R . (1993) Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal function. IEEE Tran. Inf.
Theory, 39, 930–945.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 36 ===
682 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
BARRON,E ., CANNARSA,P ., JENSEN,R . & SINESTRARI,C . (1999) Regularity of Hamilton–Jacobi equations when forward
is backward. Indiana Univ. Math. J., 48, 1–409.
BHA TTACHARY A,K ., HOSSEINI,B ., KOV ACHKI,N .B . & STUART,A .M . (2021) Model reduction and neural networks for
parametric PDEs. SMAI J. Comput. Math. , 7, 121–157.
BOULLÉ,N . , EARLS,C . J . & TOWNSEND,A . (2022) Data-driven discovery of green’s functions with human-
understandable deep learning. Sci. Rep., 12, 1–9.
BOULLÉ,N . & TOWNSEND,A . (2022) Learning elliptic partial differential equations with randomized linear algebra.
F ound. Comput. Math., 23, 709–739.
CHEN,T . & CHEN,H . (1995) Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks with arbitrary
activation functions and its application to dynamical systems. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, 6, 911–917.
CHOW,S . - N .& HALE,J .K . (2012) Methods of Bifurcation Theory,v o l .251. New Y ork: Springer Science & Business
Media.
CHOW,Y .T ., DARBON,J . , OSHER,S . & YIN,W . (2017) Algorithm for overcoming the curse of dimensionality for
time-dependent non-convex Hamilton–Jacobi equations arising from optimal control and differential games
problems. J. Sci. Comput., 73, 617–643.
CHOW,Y .T ., DARBON,J . , OSHER,S . & YIN,W . (2019) Algorithm for overcoming the curse of dimensionality for
state-dependent Hamilton–Jacobi equations. J. Comput. Phys., 387, 376–409.
CHRISTENSEN,O . et al. (2003) An Introduction to Frames and Riesz Bases ,v o l .7. Science+Business Media, New
Y ork: Springer.
DAHLKE,S ., DE MARI, GROHS,P . & LABA TE,D . (2015) Harmonic and Applied Analysis. Appl. Numer . Harmon. Anal.
Cham Heidelberg New Y ork Dordrecht London: Springer International Publishing Switzerland.
DARBON,J ., DOWER,P .M .& MENG,T . (2023) Neural network architectures using min-plus algebra for solving certain
high-dimensional optimal control problems and Hamilton–Jacobi pdes. Math. Control Signals Syst., 35, 1–44.
DARBON,J ., LANGLOIS,G .P . & MENG,T . (2020) Overcoming the curse of dimensionality for some Hamilton–Jacobi
partial differential equations via neural network architectures. Res. Math. Sci., 7, 1–50.
DARBON,J . & MENG,T . (2021) On some neural network architectures that can represent viscosity solutions of certain
high dimensional Hamilton–Jacobi partial differential equations. J. Comput. Phys., 425, 109907.
DARBON,J . & OSHER,S . (2016) Algorithms for overcoming the curse of dimensionality for certain Hamilton–Jacobi
equations arising in control theory and elsewhere. Res. Math. Sci., 3, 1–26.
DE HOOP,M ., HUANG,D .Z ., QIAN,E . & STUART,A .M . (2022) The cost-accuracy trade-off in operator learning with
neural networks. J. Mach. Learn., 1, 299–341.
DE HOOP,M .V . , KOV ACHKI,N .B . , NELSEN,N .H . & STUART,A .M . (2023) Convergence rates for learning linear
operators from noisy data. SIAM/ASA J. Uncertainty Quantif. , 11, 480–513.
DENG,B ., SHIN,Y ., LU,L ., ZHANG,Z . & KARNIADAKIS,G .E . (2022) Approximation rates of deeponets for learning
operators arising from advection—Diffusion equations. Neural Networks, 153, 411–426.
DEVORE,R .A ., HANIN,B . & PETROV A,G . (2021) Neural network approximation. Acta Numer ., 30, 327–444.
DEVORE,R .A . (1998) Nonlinear approximation. Acta Numer ., 7, 51–150.
DONOHO,D .L . (2001) Sparse components of images and optimal atomic decompositions. Constr . Approx., 17,
353–382.
EV ANS,L .C . (2010) Partial Differential Equations. Providence, R.I: American Mathematical Society.
GOODFELLOW,I ., BENGIO,Y . & COURVILLE,A . (2016) Deep Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
GRIBONV AL,R . , KUTYNIOK,G . , NIELSEN,M . & VOIGTLAENDER,F . (2022) Approximation spaces of deep neural
networks. Constr . Approx., 55, 259–367.
HEIL,C . (2010) A Basis Theory Primer: Expanded Edition . New Y ork: Springer Science & Business Media.
HERRMANN,L ., SCHW AB,C . & ZECH,J . (2020) Deep ReLU neural network expression rates for data-to-qoi maps in
Bayesian PDE inversion. SAM Res. Rep. , 36, 125011.
HERRMANN,L ., SCHW AB,C . & ZECH,J . (2024) Neural and GPC operator surrogates: Construction and expression rate
bounds. Advances in Computational Mathematics , 50, 72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10444-024-10171-2.
HESTHA VEN,J .S . & UBBIALI,S . (2018) Non-intrusive reduced order modeling of nonlinear problems using neural
networks. J. Comput. Phys., 363, 55–78.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 37 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 683
HUA,N . & LU,W . (2023) Basis operator network: A neural network-based model for learning nonlinear operators
via neural basis. Neural Networks, 164, 21–37.
HURÉ,C ., PHAM,H ., BACHOUCH,A . & LANGRENÉ,N . (2021) Deep neural networks algorithms for stochastic control
problems on finite horizon: Convergence analysis. SIAM J. Numer . Anal., 59, 525–557.
JIN,P ., ZHANG,Z ., ZHU,A ., TANG,Y .& KARNIADAKIS,G .E . (2020) Sympnets: Intrinsic structure-preserving symplectic
networks for identifying Hamiltonian systems. Neural Networks, 132, 166–179.
KHOO,Y ., LU,J . & YING,L . (2021) Solving parametric PDE problems with artificial neural networks. European J.
Appl. Math., 32, 421–435.
KOHLER,M . & LANGER,S . (2021) On the rate of convergence of fully connected deep neural network regression
estimates. Ann. Stat., 49, 2231–2249.
KOROLEV,Y . (2022) Two-layer neural networks with values in a banach space. SIAM J. Math. Anal., 54, 6358–6389.
KOV ACHKI,N .B ., LANTHALER,S . & MISHRA,S . (2021) On universal approximation and error bounds for Fourier neural
operators. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 22, 1–76.
KOV ACHKI,N .B . , LI,Z . , LIU,B . , AZIZZADENESHELI,K . , BHA TTACHARY A,K . , STUART,A . & ANANDKUMAR,A . (2023)
Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with applications to PDEs. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 24,
1–97.
LANTHALER,S . (2023) Operator learning with PCA-net: Upper and lower complexity bounds. J. Mach. Learn. Res. ,
24, 1–67.
LANTHALER,S . (2024) Operator Learning of Lipschitz Operators: An Information-Theoretic Perspective ,
arXiv:2406.18794.
LANTHALER,S ., LI,Z . & STUART,A .M .(2023a) The nonlocal neural operator: Universal approximation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.13221.
LANTHALER,S . , MOLINARO,R . , HADORN,P . & MISHRA,S . (2023b) Nonlinear reconstruction for operator learn-
ing of PDEs with discontinuities. Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations . https://
openreview.net/forum?id=CrfhZAsJDsZ.
LANTHALER,S ., MISHRA,S . & KARNIADAKIS,G .E . (2022) Error estimates for DeepONets: A deep learning framework
in infinite dimensions. Trans. Math. Appl., 6, 1–141.
LI,Z . , KOV ACHKI,N . B . , AZIZZADENESHELI,K . , LIU,B . , BHA TTACHARY A,K . , STUART,A . M . & ANANDKUMAR,A .
(2021) Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. Ninth International Conference
on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=c8P9NQVtmnO.
LIU,H . , YANG,H . , CHEN,M . , ZHAO,T . & LIAO,W . (2024) Deep nonparametric estimation of operators between
infinite dimensional spaces. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 25, 1–67.
LU,J ., SHEN,Z ., YANG,H . & ZHANG,S . (2021a) Deep network approximation for smooth functions. SIAM J. Math.
Anal., 53, 5465–5506.
LU,L ., JIN,P ., PANG,G ., ZHANG,Z . & KARNIADAKIS,G .E . (2021b) Learning nonlinear operators via deeponet based
on the universal approximation theorem of operators. Nat. Mach. Intell., 3, 218–229.
MA,C . , WU,L . & WEINAN,E . (2022) The Barron space and the flow-induced function spaces for neural network
models. Constr . Approx., 55, 369–406.
MARCA TI,C . & SCHW AB,C . (2023) Exponential convergence of deep operator networks for elliptic partial differential
equations. SIAM J. Numer . Anal., 61, 1513–1545.
MENG,T ., ZHANG,Z . , DARBON,J . & KARNIADAKIS,G . (2022) Sympocnet: Solving optimal control problems with
applications to high-dimensional multiagent path planning problems. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 44, B1341–B1368.
MHASKAR,H .N . , LIAO,Q . & POGGIO,T . (2016) Learning real and Boolean functions: When is deep better than
shallow. Technical report, Center for Brains, minds and machines (CBMM).
MHASKAR,H .N . & HAHM,N . (1997) Neural networks for functional approximation and system identification. Neural
Comput., 9, 143–159.
NAKAMURA-ZIMMERER,T ., GONG,Q . & KANG,W . (2020) Qrnet: Optimal regulator design with lqr-augmented neural
networks. IEEE Control Syst. Lett. , 5, 1303–1308.
NELSEN,N .H . & STUART,A .M . (2021) The random feature model for input-output maps between banach spaces.
SIAM J. Sci. Comput. , 43, A3212–A3243.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 38 ===
684 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
OPSCHOOR,J .A . , SCHW AB,C . & ZECH,J . (2022) Exponential relu dnn expression of holomorphic maps in high
dimension. Constr . Approx., 55, 537–582.
PA TEL,D . , RAY,D . , ABDELMALIK,M .R . , HUGHES,T .J . & OBERAI,A .A . (2024) V ariationally mimetic operator
networks. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. , 419, 116536, 1–30.
PETERSEN,P . & VOIGTLAENDER,F . (2018) Optimal approximation of piecewise smooth functions using deep relu
neural networks. Neural Networks, 108, 296–330.
ROBBINS,H . & MONRO,S . (1951) A stochastic approximation method. Ann. Math. Stat., 22, 400–407.
RYCK,T .D . & MISHRA,S . (2022) Generic bounds on the approximation error for physics-informed (and) operator
learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (A. H. OH,A .A GARW AL,D .B ELGRA VE&K .C HO
eds.). https://openreview.net/forum?id=bF4eYy3LTR9.
SCHW AB,C ., STEIN,A . & ZECH,J . (2023) Deep operator network approximation rates for lipschitz operators. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.09835.
SCHW AB,C . & ZECH,J . (2019) Deep learning in high dimension: Neural network expression rates for generalized
polynomial chaos expansions in UQ. Anal. Appl., 17, 19–55.
SEIDMAN,J ., KISSAS,G ., PERDIKARIS,P . & PAPPAS,G .J . (2022) NOMAD: Nonlinear manifold decoders for operator
learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35, 5601–5613.
STEIN,E .M . & SHAKARCHI,R . (2009) Real Analysis: Measure Theory, Integration, and Hilbert Spaces . Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
WENDLAND,H . (2004) Scattered Data Approximation,v o l .17. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
YAROTSKY,D . (2017) Error bounds for approximations with deep ReLU networks. Neural Networks, 94, 103–114
Publisher: Elsevier.
YAROTSKY,D . & ZHEVNERCHUK,A . (2020) The phase diagram of approximation rates for deep neural networks.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 33, 13005–13015.
YOU,H ., ZHANG,Q ., ROSS,C .J ., LEE,C . - H .& YU,Y . (2022) Learning deep implicit fourier neural operators (ifnos)
with applications to heterogeneous material modeling. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. , 398, 115296.
ZHANG,Z . , TAT,L . & SCHAEFFER,H . (2023) BelNet: Basis enhanced learning, a mesh-free neural operator.
Proceedings of the Royal Society A , 479, 20230043, 1–30.
ZHU,Y . & ZABARAS,N . (2018) Bayesian deep convolutional encoder–decoder networks for surrogate modeling and
uncertainty quantification. J. Comput. Phys., 366, 415–447.
Appendix A. Proof of curse of parametric complexity
A.1 Preliminaries in finite dimensions
Our goal in this section is to prove Proposition 2.1, which we repeat here:
To this end we recall and extend several results from Y arotsky (2017)on the ReLU neural network
approximation of functions f : RD → R. Subsequently, these results will be used as building blocks to
construct functionals in the infinite-dimensional context, leading to a curse of parametric complexity in
that setting, made precise in Theorem 2.11. Here, we consider the space Cr(RD) consisting of r-times
continuously differentiable functions f : RD → R. We denote by
FD,r :=
{
f ∈ Cr(RD)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⏐sup
|α|≤r
sup
x∈RD
⏐⏐Dα f(x)
⏐⏐≤ 1
}
the unit ball in Cr(RD). For technical reasons it will often be more convenient to consider the subset
◦
FD,r ⊂ FD,r consisting of functions f ∈ FD,r vanishing at the origin, f(0)= 0.
REMARK A1. We note that previous work ( Ya r o t s ky, 2017) considers the Sobolev space Wr,∞([0, 1]D)
and the unit ball in Wr,∞([0, 1]D), rather than Cr(RD) and our definition of FD,r. It turns out that the
complexity bounds of Ya r o t s ky(2017) remain true also in our setting (with essentially identical proofs).
We include the necessary arguments below. ♦
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 39 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 685
Let f : RD → R be a function. Following ( Y arotsky, 2017, section 4.3) we will denote by N(f ,ϵ)
the minimal number of hidden computation units that is required to approximate f to accuracy ϵ by an
arbitrary ReLU feedforward network Ψ , uniformly over the unit cube [0, 1]D, i.e., N(f ,ϵ)is the minimal
integer M such that there exists an ReLU neural network Ψ with at most M computation units4 and such
that
sup
x∈[0,1]D
|f(x)− Ψ( x)|≤ ϵ.
REMARK A2. We emphasize that, even though the domain of a function f ∈ FD,r is by definition the
whole space RD, the above quantity N(f ,ϵ) only relates to the approximation of f over the unit cube
[0, 1]D. The reason for this seemingly awkward choice is that it will greatly simplify our arguments later
on, when we construct functionals on infinite-dimensional Banach spaces with a view towards proving
an infinite-dimensional analogue of the CoD. ♦
Note that the number of (nontrivial) hidden computation units M of a neural network Ψ : RD → R
obeys the bounds M ≤ size(Ψ )≤ 5DM4: the lower bound follows from the fact that each (nontrivial)
computation unit has at least one nonzero connection or a bias feeding into it. To derive the upper bound
we note that any network with at most M computation units can be embedded in a fully connected
enveloping network (allowing skip-connections) ( Y arotsky, 2017, cf. fig. 6(a)) with depth M, width M,
where each hidden node is connected to all other M2 − 1 hidden nodes plus the output, and where each
node in the input layer is connected to all M2 hidden units plus the output. In addition, we take into
account that each computation unit and the output layer have an additional bias. The existence of this
enveloping network thus implies the size bound
size(Ψ )≤ M2(M2 − 1)+ M2
  
hidden connections
+ D(M2 + 1)  
input conn.
+ M+ 1
biases
≤ M4 + 2DM4 + M+ 1≤ 5DM4,
valid for any neural network Ψ : RD → R with at most M computation units.
In view of the lower size bound, size (Ψ )≥ M, Proposition 2.1 above is now clearly implied by the
following:
PROPOSITION A3. Fix r∈ N. There is a universal constant γ> 0 and a constant ϵ= ϵ(r)> 0, depending
only on r, such that for any D∈ N there exists a function fD ∈
◦
FD,r for which
N(fD,ϵ)≥ ϵ−γ D/r, ∀ϵ≤ ϵ.
♦
As an immediate corollary of PropositionA3 we conclude that fD cannot be approximated to accuracy
ϵby a family of ReLU neural networks Ψϵ with
size(Ψϵ)= o(ϵ−γ D/r).
The latter conclusion was established by Y arotsky ( Y arotsky, 2017, theorem 5) (with γ = 1/9).
Proposition 2.1 improves on Y arotsky’s result in two important ways: firstly, it implies that the lower
4 The number of computation units equals the number of scalar evaluations of the activation σ in a forward-pass, cf. Anthony
& Bartlett (1999) .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 40 ===
686 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
bound size(Ψϵ) ≥ ϵ−γ D/r holds for all ϵ≤ ϵ, and not only along a (unspecified) sequence ϵk → 0;
secondly, it shows that the constantϵcan be chosen independently of D. This generalization of Y arotsky’s
result will be crucial for the extension to the infinite-dimensional case, which is the goal of this work.
To prove Proposition A3 we will need two intermediate results, which build on Y arotsky (2017).W e
start with the following lemma providing a lower bound on the required size of a fixed neural network
architecture, which is able to approximate arbitrary f ∈
◦
FD,r to accuracy ϵ≥ 0. This result is based
on ( Y arotsky, 2017, theorem 4(a)), but explicitly quantifies the dependence on the dimension D.T h i s
dependence was left unspecified in earlier work.
LEMMA A4. Fix r ∈ N.L e t Ψ = Ψ(· ; θ) be an ReLU neural network architecture depending on
parameters θ ∈ RW . There exists a constant c0 = c0(r)> 0, such that if
sup
f∈
◦
FD,r
inf
θ∈RW
∥f − Ψ(· ; θ)∥L∞([0,1]D) ≤ ϵ,
for some ϵ> 0 then W ≥ (c0ϵ)−D/2r. ♦
Proof. The proof in Ya r o t s ky(2017) is based on the V apnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension. We will not
repeat the entire argument here, but instead discuss only the required changes in the proof of Y arotsky,
which are needed to prove our extension of his result. In fact, there are only two differences between the
proof our Lemma A.4, and (Ya r o t s ky, 2017, theorem 4(a)), which we now point out: the first difference
is that we consider
◦
FD,r, consisting of Cr(RD) functions vanishing at the origin, whereas Ya r o t s ky(2017)
considers the unit ball in Wr,∞([0, 1]D). Nevertheless, the proof of Ya r o t s ky(2017) applies to our setting
in a straightforward way. To see this we recall that the construction in ( Ya r o t s ky, 2017, proof of theorem
4, eq. (35)) considers f ∈ FD,r of the form
f(x)=
ND
∑
m=1
ymφ(N(x− xm)),( A . 1 )
with coefficients ym to be determined later, and where φ : RD → R is a C∞ bump function, which is
required to satisfy 5
φ(0)= 1 and φ(x)= 0, if ∥x∥ℓ∞ > 1/2. (A.2)
In ( A.1), the points x1,... , xND ∈ [0, 1]D are chosen such that the ℓ∞-distance between any two of
them is at least 1 /N. We can easily ensure that f(0) = 0, by choosing the points xm to be of the form
(j1, ... , jD)/N, where j1,... , jD ∈{ 1,... , N}. Then, since for any multi-index α of order |α|≤ r the
mixed derivative
max
x
|Dα f(x)|≤ Nr max
m
|ym| max
x
|Dαφ(x)|,
any function f of the form ( A.1) belongs to
◦
FD,r, provided that
max
m
|ym|≤ ˜c1N−r,
5 We note that choosing the ℓ∞ to define the set where φ(x)= 0, rather than the ℓ2 Euclidean distance as in Ya r o t s ky(2017), is
immaterial. The only requirement is that the support of the functions on the right-hand side in the definition ( A.1) do not overlap.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 41 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 687
where
˜c1 =
(
sup
|α|≤r
sup
x∈[0,1]D
|Dαφ(x)|
⎞−1
.( A . 3 )
As shown in Y arotsky (2017) the above construction allows one to encode arbitrary Boolean values
z1, ... , zND ∈{ 0, 1} by construction suitable f ∈
◦
FD,r; this in turn can be used to estimate a VC-dimension
related to Ψ(· ;θ) from below, following verbatim the arguments in Y arotsky (2017). As no changes are
required in this part of the proof we will not repeat the details here; Instead, following the argument
leading up to (
Y arotsky, 2017, eq. (38)), and under the assumptions of Lemma A.4, Y arotsky’s argument
immediately implies the following lower bound:
W ≥˜c0
( 3ϵ
˜c1
⎞−D/2r
,
where˜c0 is an absolute constant.
To finish our proof of LemmaA.4, it remains to determine the dependence of the constant˜c1 in (A.3),
on the parameters D and r. To this end, we construct a specific bump function φ : RD → R. Recall that
our only requirement on φ in the above argument is that ( A2) must hold. To construct suitable φ,l e t
φ0 : R→ R, ξ ↦→ φ0(ξ) be a smooth bump function such that φ0(0)= 1,∥φ0∥L∞ ≤ 1 and φ0(ξ) = 0
for|ξ| > 1/2. We now make the particular choice
φ(x1,... , xD) :=
D∏
j=1
φ0(xj).
Let α= (α1, ... ,αD) be a multi-index with |α|= ∑ D
j=1 αj ≤ r.L e tκ :=|{ αj ̸= 0} denote the number
of nonzero components of α. We note that κ ≤ r. We thus have
|Dαφ(x)|=
D∏
j=1
|Dαj φ0(xj)|≤
∏
αj̸=0
|Dαj φ0(xj)|≤∥φ0∥κ
Cr(R) ≤∥φ0∥r
Cr(R).
In particular, we conclude that ˜c1 = [sup|α|≤r supx∈[0,1]D |Dαφ(x)|]−1 can be bounded from below by
˜c1 ≥˜c2 :=∥φ0∥−r
Cr(R), where˜c2 =˜c2(r) clearly only depends on r, and is independent of the ambient
dimension D. The claimed inequality of Lemma A.4 now follows from
W ≥˜c0
( 3ϵ
˜c1
⎞−D/2r
≥
( 3ϵ
(˜c0 ∧ 1)2r/D˜c2
⎞−D/2r
≥
( 3ϵ
(˜c0 ∧ 1)2r˜c2
⎞−D/2r
,
i.e., we have W ≥ (c0ϵ)−D/2r with constant
c0 = 3
(˜c0 ∧ 1)2r˜c2(r) ,
depending only on r. □
While Lemma A4 applies to a fixed architecture capable of approximating all f ∈
◦
FD,r, our goal is
to instead construct a single f ∈
◦
FD,r for which a similar lower complexity bound holds for arbitrary
architectures. The construction of such f will rely on the following lemma, based on ( Y arotsky, 2017,
Lem. 3):
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 42 ===
688 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
LEMMA A5. Fix r∈ N. For any (fixed) ϵ> 0, there exists fϵ∈
◦
FD,r, such that
N(fϵ,ϵ)≥ D−1/4(c1ϵ)−D/8r,
where c1 = c1(r)> 0 depends only on r. ♦
Proof. As explained above, any neural network (with potentially sparse architecture), Ψ : RD → R,
with M computation units can be embedded in the fully connected architecture ˜Ψ(· ; θ) , θ ∈ RW , with
size bound W ≤ 5DM4. By Lemma A4, it follows that if W ≤ 5DM4 <( c0ϵ)−D/2r, then there exists
fϵ∈
◦
FD,r, such that
inf
θ∈RW
∥fϵ− ˜Ψ(· ; θ)∥L∞ >ϵ .
Expressing the above size bound in terms of M, it follows that for any network Ψ with M <
(5D)−1/4(c0ϵ)−D/8r computation units, we must have ∥fϵ− Ψ∥L∞ >ϵ . Thus, approximation of fϵ
to within accuracy ϵ requires at least M ≥ (5D)−1/4(c0ϵ)−D/8r computation units. From the definition
of N(fϵ, ϵ), we conclude that
N(fϵ,ϵ)≥ D−1/4(c1ϵ)−D/8r,
for this choice of fϵ∈
◦
FD,r, with constant c1 = 52rc0(r) depending only on r. □
Lemma A5 will be our main technical tool for the proof of PropositionA3. We also recall thatN(f ,ϵ)
satisfies the following properties, ( Y arotsky, 2017, eq. (42)–(44)):
N(af ,|a|ϵ)= N(f ,ϵ), (A.4a)
N(f ± g,ϵ+∥g∥L∞ )≤ N(f ,ϵ), (A.4b)
N(f1 ± f2,ϵ1 + ϵ2)≤ N(f1,ϵ1)+ N(f2,ϵ2). (A.4c)
Proof (Proposition A3). We define a rapidly decaying sequence ϵk → 0, by ϵ1 = 1/4 and ϵk+1 = ϵ2
k ,
so that by recursion ϵk = 2−2k
. We also define ak := 1
2ϵ1/2
k = 1
2ϵk−1. For later reference, we note that
since ϵk ≤ 1/2 for all k,w eh a v e
∞∑
s=k+1
as = 1
2
(
ϵk + ϵ2
k + ϵ22
k + ...
⎞
≤ 1
2ϵk
∞∑
s=0
2−s = ϵk.( A . 5 )
Our goal is to construct f ∈
◦
FD,r of the form
f =
∞∑
k=1
akfk, with fk ∈
◦
FD,r ∀ k∈ N.
We note that ak ≤ 2−k, hence if f is of the above form then,
∥f∥Cr ≤
∞∑
s=1
as∥fs∥Cr ≤ 1, f(0)=
∞∑
s=1
as fs(0)
=0
= 0,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 43 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 689
implies that f ∈
◦
FD,r irrespective of the specific choice of fk ∈
◦
FD,r. In the following construction, we
choose γ := 1/32 throughout. We determine fk recursively, formally starting from the empty sum, i.e.,
f = 0. In the recursive step, given f1,... , fk−1, we distinguish two cases:
Case 1: Assume that
N
( k−1∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
≥ ϵ−γ D/r
k .
In this case, we set fk := 0, and trivially obtain
N
( k∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
≥ ϵ−γ D/r
k .( A . 6 )
Case 2: In the other case, we have
N
( k−1∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
<ϵ−γ D/r
k .
Our first goal is to again choose fk such that (A.6) holds, at least for sufficiently large k. We note that, by
the general properties of N ,( A.4c), and the assumption of Case 2:
N
( k∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
≥ N(akfk,4ϵk)− N
( k−1∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
≥ N(akfk,4ϵk)− ϵ−γ D/r
k .( A . 7 )
By Lemma A5, we can find fk ∈
◦
FD,r, such that
N(akfk,4ϵk)
(A.4a)
↓
= N(fk,4ϵk/ak)= N(fk,4ϵ1/2
k )≥ D−1/4(8c1ϵ1/2
k )−D/8r.( A . 8 )
This defines our recursive choice of fk in Case 2. By ( A.7) and ( A.8), to obtain ( A.6) it now suffices to
show that
D−1/4(8c1ϵ1/2
k )−D/8r ≥ 2ϵ−γ D/r
k .
It turns out that there exists ϵ> 0 depending only on r, such that
(82c2
1ϵk)−D/16r ≥ 2D1/4ϵ−γ D/r
k = (2−r/γ DD−r/(4γ D)ϵk)−γ D/r,
for all ϵk ≤ ϵ, and where γ = 1/32. In fact, upon raising both sides to the exponent −32r/D,i ti s
straightforward to see that this inequality holds independently of D∈ N, provided that
ϵk ≤ infD D−r/(4γ D)
[28r8c1(r)]4 ,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 44 ===
690 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
where we note that inf D D−r/(4γ D) > 0 on account of the fact that lim D→∞ D−1/D = 1. Define ϵby
ϵ(r) := min
{
k∈ N
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⏐ϵ
k ≤ infD D−r/(4γ D)
[28r8c1(r)]4
}
.
With this choice of ϵ,γ> 0, and by construction of fk, we then have
N
( k∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
≥ ϵ−γ D/r
k ,( A . 9 )
for all ϵk ≤ ϵ. This is inequality ( A.6), and concludes our discussion of Case 2.
Continuing the above construction by recursion, we obtain a sequence f1, f2,···∈
◦
FD,r, such that
(A.9) holds for any k∈ N such that ϵk ≤ ϵ.D e f i n ef = ∑∞
k=1 akfk. We claim that for any ϵ≤ ϵwe have
N(f ,ϵ)≥ ϵ−γ D/2r.
To see this, we fix ϵ≤ ϵ. Choose k∈ N, such that ϵk ≤ ϵand ϵ2
k ≤ ϵ≤ ϵk. Then,
N(f ,ϵ)≥ N(f ,ϵk)= N
( ∞∑
s=1
asfs,ϵk
⎞
(A.4b)
↓
≥ N
⎛
⎝
k∑
s=1
asfs,ϵk +


∞∑
s=k+1
asfs


L∞
⎞
⎠
≥ N
( k∑
s=1
asfs,ϵk +
∞∑
s=k+1
as
⎞
(A.5)
↓
≥ N
( k∑
s=1
asfs,2ϵk
⎞
(A.9)
↓
≥ ϵ−γ D/r
k ≥ ϵ−γ D/2r,
where the last inequality follows from ϵk ≤ ϵ1/2. The claim of Proposition A3 thus follows for all ϵ≤ ϵ,
upon redefining the universal constant as γ = (1/32)/2= 1/64. □
A.2 Proof of Lemma 2.7
Proof (Lemma 2.7). Since the interior of Ω is nonempty, then upon a rescaling and shift of the domain,
we may wlog assume that [0, 2 π ]d ⊂ Ω. Let us define eκ ∝ sin(κ· x) as a suitable re-normalization of
the standard Fourier sine-basis, indexed by κ ∈ Nd, and normalized such that ∥eκ∥Cs = 1. We note that
for each eκ we can define a bi-orthogonal functional e∗
κ by
e∗
κ(u) := 2
(2π) d
∫
[0,2π ]d
u(x) sin(κ· x) dx.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 45 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 691
The norm of e∗
κ is easily seen to be bounded by 2. Hence, for any enumeration j↦→ κ(j), the sequence
eκ(j) satisfies the assumptions in the definition of a infinite-dimensional hypercube.
Furthermore, if j ↦→ κ(j) is an enumeration of κ ∈ Nd, such that j ↦→∥κ(j)∥ℓ∞ is monotonically
increasing (nondecreasing), we note that any series of the form
u= A
∞∑
j=1
j−α yj eκ(j), yj ∈ [0, 1],
is absolutely convergent in Cρ(Ω), provided that
∞∑
j=1
j−α∥eκ(j)∥Cρ(Ω) ∼
∞∑
j=1
j−α∥κ(j)∥ρ−s
ℓ∞ <∞.
Inverting the enumeration j= j(κ) for κ ∈ Nd, and setting K :=∥κ∥ℓ∞ ,w ef i n dt h a t
#
{
κ′∈ Nd
⏐⏐
⏐∥κ
′∥ℓ∞ < K
}
≤ j(κ) ≤ #
{
κ′∈ Nd
⏐⏐
⏐∥κ
′∥ℓ∞ ≤ K
}
,
where the number of elements in the lower and upper bounding sets are ∼ Kd. We thus conclude that
j(κ) ∼ Kd. We also note that each shell
{
κ ∈ Nd ⏐⏐∥κ∥ℓ∞ = K
}
, with K∈ N, contains∼ Kd−1 elements.
Thus, we have
∞∑
j=1
j−α∥κ(j)∥ρ−s
ℓ∞ ∼
∞∑
K=1
∑
∥κ∥ℓ∞=K
j(κ)−α∥κ∥ρ−s
ℓ∞
∼
∞∑
K=1
K−αd ∑
∥κ∥ℓ∞=K
∥κ∥ρ−s
ℓ∞
∼
∞∑
K=1
K−αdKd−1Kρ−s
=
∞∑
K=1
K
−1−d
(
α−1−ρ−s
d
⎞
.
The last sum converges if α> 1− ρ−s
d . Thus, choosing A > 0 sufficiently small then ensures that
Qα = Qα(A; e1, e2,...) is a subset of K=
{
u∈ Cρ(Ω)
⏐⏐∥u∥Cρ ≤ M
}
. □
A.3 Proof of Theorem 2.11
We now provide the detailed proof of Theorem 2.11, which builds on Proposition A.3 above.
Proof. Fix δ> 0. By assumption on K ⊂ X , there exists A > 0 and a linearly independent sequence
e1, e2,···∈ X of normed elements, such that the set Qα consisting of all u∈ X of the form
u= A
∞∑
j=1
j−α yj ej, yj ∈ [0, 1],
defines a subset Qα ⊂ K.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 46 ===
692 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
Step 1 (Finding embedded cubes ≃[0, 1]D). We note that for any k ∈ N and for any choice of
yj ∈ [0, 1], with indices j= 2k,... ,2 k+1 − 1, we have
u= A2−(k+1)α
2k+1−1∑
j=2k
yjej ∈ Qα . (A.10)
Set D= 2k, and let us denote the set of all such u by QD, in the following. Note that up to the constant
rescaling by A2−(k+1)α , QD can be identified with the D-dimensional unit cube [0, 1] D. In particular,
since QD ⊂ Qα ⊂ K, it follows that K contains a rescaled copy of [0, 1] D for any such D. Furthermore,
it will be important in our construction that all of the embedded cubes, defined by ( A.10)f o rk∈ N, only
intersect at the origin.
By Proposition A3, there exist constants γ , ϵ> 0, independent of D, such that given any D = 2k,
we can find fD : RD → R, fD ∈
◦
FD,r, for which the following lower complexity bound holds:
N(fD,ϵ)≥ ϵ−γ D/r, ∀ϵ≤ ϵ. (A.11)
Our aim is to construct S† : X → R, such that the restriction S†|QD
to the cube QD ≃[0, 1]D
‘reproduces’ this fD. If this can be achieved, then our intuition is that S† embeds all fD for D = 2k,
k∈ N, at once, and hence a rescaled version of the lower complexity bound ≳D ϵ−γ D/r should hold for
any D. Our next aim is to make this precise, and determine the implicit constant that arises due to the
fact that QD is only a rescaled version of [0, 1] D.
Step 2 (Construction of S†). To construct suitable S†, we first recall that we assume the existence of
‘bi-orthogonal’ elements e∗
1, e∗
2,... in the continuous dual space X∗, such that
e∗
i (ej)= δij, ∀ i, j∈ N,
and furthermore, there exists a constant M > 0, such that∥e∗
j∥X∗ ≤ M for all j∈ N. Given the functions
fD = f2k from Step 1, we now make the following ansatz for S†:
S†(u)=
∞∑
k=1
2−α∗rkf2k
(
A−12(k+1)α
[
e∗
2k (u),... , e∗
2k+1−1(u)
]⎞
. (A.12)
Here, f2k = fD (for D= 2k) satisfies ( A.11) and α∗ = 1+ α+ δ/2. We note in passing that S† defines
a r-times Fréchet differentiable functional. This will be rigorously shown in Lemma A7 below (with
c= A−12α ).
Step 3 (Relating S† with fD). We next show in which way ‘the restriction S†|QD
to the cube QD ≃
[0, 1]D reproduces fD’. Note that if u∈ QD is of the form ( A.10) with D= 2k and with coefficients
y := [y2k ,... , y2k+1−1]∈ [0, 1]2k
= [0, 1]D,
then, if k′̸= k,
[e∗
2k′(u),... , e∗
2k′+1−1(u)]= [0,... ,0 ] ,
while for k′= k we find
[e∗
2k (u),... , e∗
2k+1−1(u)]= [y2k ,... , y2k+1−1]= y.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 47 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 693
From the fact that f2k′(0)= 0 for all k′by construction (recall that f2k′∈
◦
F2k′,r), we conclude that
S†(u)= 2−α∗rkf2k (y)= D−α∗rfD(y), (A.13)
for any u∈ QD. In this sense, ‘ S†|QD
reproduces fD’.
Step 4 (Lower complexity bound, uniform in D). Let Sϵ : X → R be a family of operators of neural
network-type, such that
sup
u∈K
|S†(u)− Sϵ(u)|≤ ϵ, ∀ϵ> 0.
By assumption on Sϵ being of neural network-type, there exists ℓ= ℓϵ∈ N, a linear mapping Lϵ : X →
Rℓ, and Φϵ : Rℓ→ R a neural network representing Sϵ:
Sϵ(u)= Φϵ(Lϵu), ∀ u∈ X .
For D= 2k, k∈ N, define ιD : RD → X by
ιD(y)= A2−αk
2k
∑
j=1
yje2k+j−1.
Then, since Lϵ◦ ιD : RD → Rℓ is a linear mapping, there exists a matrix WD ∈ Rℓ×D, such that
Lϵ◦ ιD(y)= WDy for all y∈ RD. In particular, it follows that
Sϵ(ιD(y))= Φϵ(Wdy),
By (A.10), we clearly have ιD([0, 1]D)= QD.L e t ˆΦϵ(y) := Dα∗rΦϵ(WDy). It now follows that
sup
y∈[0,1]D
⏐⏐fD(y)− ˆΦϵ(y)
⏐⏐= Dα∗r sup
y∈[0,1]D
⏐⏐
⏐D
−α∗rfD(y)− Φϵ(WDy)
⏐⏐
⏐
= D
α∗r sup
u∈QD
⏐⏐
⏐S
†(u)− Sϵ(u)
⏐⏐
⏐
≤ D
α∗r sup
u∈K
⏐⏐
⏐S
†(u)− Sϵ(u)
⏐⏐
⏐
≤ D
α∗rϵ.
Let M denote the number of hidden computation units of ˆΦϵ. By construction of fD (cp. Proposition A3),
we have
size(ˆΦϵ)≥ M≥ N(fD, Dα∗rϵ)≥ (Dα∗rϵ)−γ D/r,
whenever Dα∗rϵ≤ ϵ. On the other hand, we can also estimate (cp. equation ( 2.2) in Section 2.1.2),
size(ˆΦϵ)≤ 2∥WD∥0 + 2s i z e(Φϵ)≤ 2Dsize(Φϵ)+ 2s i z e(Φϵ)≤ 4Dsize(Φϵ).
Combining these bounds, we conclude that
size(Φϵ)≥ 1
2D(Dα∗rϵ)−γ D/r = 1
2(Dα∗r+r/γ Dϵ)−γ D/r,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 48 ===
694 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
holds for any neural network representation of Sϵ, whenever Dα∗rϵ≤ ϵ. And hence
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ 1
2(Dα∗r+r/γ Dϵ)−γ D/r, (A.14)
whenever Dα∗rϵ≤ ϵ. By Lemma A6 below, taking the supremum on the right over all admissible D
implies the lower bound
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α∗+δ/2)r), ∀ϵ≤˜ϵ,
where˜ϵ, c > 0 depend only on α∗, r,ϵ(r),δ and γ . Recalling our choice of α∗ = 1+ α+ δ/2, and the
fact that the constant ϵ= ϵ(r) depends only on r, while γ is universal, it follows that
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r), ∀ϵ≤˜ϵ,
with ˜ϵ, c > 0 depending only on α, r,δ. Up to a change in notation, this is the claimed complexity
bound. □
The following lemma addresses the optimization of the lower bound in ( A.14):
LEMMA A6. Let r∈ N, and α∗,ϵ,γ> 0 be given. Assume that
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ 1
2
(
Dα∗r+r/γ Dϵ
⎞−γ D/r
,
for any D of the form D = 2k, k ∈ N, and whenever Dα∗rϵ≤ ϵ. Fix a small parameter δ> 0. There
exist˜ϵ, c > 0, depending only on r,α∗,γ ,ϵ,δ, such that
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ exp
(
cϵ−1/(α∗+δ)r
⎞
, ∀ϵ≤˜ϵ.
♦
Proof. Write ϵ= e−β for β ∈ R. Fix a small parameter δ> 0. Since we restrict attention to ϵ≤˜ϵ,w e
have
(
eβϵ
⎞−1/(α∗+δ)r
≥
(
eβ˜ϵ
⎞−1/(α∗+δ)r
= 1,
provided that˜ϵ≤ ϵ.G i v e nϵ≤˜ϵ, choose k∈ N, such that
2k−1 <
(
eβϵ
⎞−1/(α∗+δ)r
≤ 2k.
Let D= 2k. Note that this defines a function D= D(ϵ). For any ϵ, we can write
D(ϵ)= ξ
(
eβϵ
⎞−1/(α∗+δ)r
, (A.15)
for some ξ ∈ (1/2, 1]. We now note that for ϵ≤˜ϵ,
1
γ D =
(
eβϵ
⎞1/(α∗+δ)r
γξ ≤ 2
(
eβ˜ϵ
⎞1/(α∗+δ)r
γ .
Decreasing the size of ˜ϵ=˜ϵ(r,γ ,α∗,ϵ,δ) further, we can ensure that for ϵ≤˜ϵ,
1
γ D(ϵ)≤ 2
(
eβ˜ϵ
⎞1/(α∗+δ)r
γ ≤ δ
2 .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 49 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 695
Note also that 2 r/γ D ≤ 2δr/2 ≤ Dδr/2 for any D of the form D= 2k, k∈ N. It thus follows that for any
given ϵ≤˜ϵ, and with our particular choice of D= D(ϵ)satisfying (A.15), we have
2r/γ DDα∗r+r/γ Dϵ≤ D(α∗+δ)rϵ= e−βξ(α∗+δ)r ≤ e−β .
Note that this in particular implies that Dα∗rϵ≤ e−β = ϵ. We conclude that
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ 1
2(Dα∗r+r/γ Dϵ)−γ D/r
= (2r/γ DDα∗r+r/γ Dϵ)−γ D/r
≥ (D(α∗+δ)rϵ)−γ D/r
≥ exp
( βγ D
r
⎞
= exp
(
βγξ e−1/(α∗+δ)r
r ϵ−1/(α∗+δ)r
⎞
≥ exp
(
βγ e−1/(α∗+δ)r
2r ϵ−1/(α∗+δ)r
⎞
.
Upon defining c= c(r,γ ,α∗,ϵ,δ) as
c := βγ e−1/(α∗+δ)r
2r ,
we obtain the lower bound
cmplx(Sϵ)≥ exp
(
cϵ−1/(α∗+δ)r
⎞
, ∀ϵ≤ ϵ.
This concludes the proof of Lemma A6. □
In the lemma below, we provide a simple result on Fréchet differentiability which was used in our
proof of Proposition 2.11:
LEMMA A7 (Fréchet differentiability of a series). Assume that we are given a bounded family of functions
fD ∈ Cr(RD) indexed by integers D = 2k, k ∈ N, such that ∥fD∥Cr(RD) ≤ 1 for all D.L e t e∗
1, e∗
2,··· :
X → R be a sequence of linear functionals, such that ∥e∗
j∥X∗ ≤ M for all j∈ N.L e t c,α> 0b eg i v e n ,
and assume that α∗ > 1+ α. Then, the functional S† : X → R defined by the series
S†(u) :=
∞∑
k=1
2−α∗rkf2k
(
c2αk(e∗
2k (u),... , e∗
2k+1−1(u))
⎞
,
is r-times Fréchet differentiable. ♦
Proof. By assumption on f2k and the linearity of the functionals e∗
j , each nonlinear functional Fk(u) :=
f2k
(
c2αk(e∗
2k (u),... , e∗
2k+1−1(u))
⎞
in the series defining S† is r-times continuously differentiable. Fixing
u ∈ X , let us denote x = c2αk(e∗
2k (u),... , e∗
2k+1−1(u)).T h e ℓth total derivative dℓFk of Fk (ℓ≤ r)i s
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 50 ===
696 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
given by
dℓFk(u)[v1,... , vℓ]= cℓ2αℓk
2k
∑
j1,...,jℓ=1
∂ℓf2k (x)
∂xj1 ...∂ xjℓ
ℓ∏
s=1
e∗
2k+js−1(vs).
By assumption, we have
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⏐
∂
ℓf2k (x)
∂xj1 ...∂ xjℓ
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⏐≤ 1.
Since the sum over j1,... , jℓ has 2 kℓ terms, and since the functionals are bounded ∥e∗
j∥≤ M by
assumption, we can now readily estimate the operator norm ∥dℓFk(u)∥for ℓ≤ r by
∥dℓFk(u)∥≤cℓ2αℓk2kℓMℓ≤ (cM)r2(α+1)rk.
In particular, for any ℓ≤ r, the series
∞∑
k=1
2−α∗rk∥dℓFk(u)∥≤
∞∑
k=1
2−[α∗−(α+1)]rk(cM)r <∞,
is uniformly convergent. Thus, S† is a uniform limit of r-times continuously differentiable functionals,
all of whose derivatives of order ℓ≤ r are also uniformly convergent. From this, it follows that S† is
itself r-times continuously Fréchet differentiable. □
A.4 Proof of Corollary 2.12
Let Y = Y(Ω; Rp) be a function space with continuous embedding in C(Ω; Rp). We will only consider
the case p = 1, the case p > 1 following by an almost identical argument; Let φ ̸= 0 ∈ Y be a
nontrivial function. Since Y = Y(Ω) is continuously embedded in C(Ω), it follows that point evaluation
evy(φ) = φ(y) is continuous. Given that φ is nontrivial, there exists y∈ Ω, such that ev y(φ) ̸= 0. We
may wlog assume that ev y(φ) = φ(y) = 1. Let F† : X → R be a functional exposing the curse
of parametric complexity, as constructed in Theorem 2.11. We define an r-times Fréchet differentiable
operator S† : X → Y by S†(u) := F†(u)φ.
The claim now follows immediately by observing that
evy ◦ S†(u)= F†(u), ∀ u∈ X ,
and by noting that if Sϵ : X → Y is an operator of neural network-type, then ev y ◦ Sϵ : X → R is a
functional of neural network-type, and by assumption, with C :=∥evy∥Y→R,
sup
u∈K
|F†(u)− evy ◦ Sϵ(u)|= sup
u∈K
|evy ◦ S†(u)− evy ◦ Sϵ(u)|
≤ sup
u∈K
C∥S†(u)− Sϵ(u)∥Y
≤ Cϵ.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 51 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 697
By our choice of F† : X → R, this implies that the complexity of ev y ◦ Sϵ is lower bounded by an
exponential bound≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r) for some constant c= c(α,δ, r). This in turn implies that
cmplx(Sϵ)= sup
y∈Ω
cmplx(evy ◦ Sϵ)≥ exp(cϵ−1/(α+1+δ)r).
This lower bound implies the exponential lower bound of Corollary 2.12.
A.5 Proofs of Lemmas 2.18–2.7
A.5.1 Proof of Lemma 2.18
Proof (Lemma 2.18). We want to show that a PCA-Net neural operator S = R◦ Ψ ◦ E is of neural
network-type, and aim to estimate size (Ψ ) in terms of cmplx (S). To this end, we assume that Y =
Y(Ω; Rp) is a Hilbert space of functions. Since R is by definition linear, then given an evaluation point
y ∈ Ω, the mapping β ↦→ R(β)(y) ≡ evy ◦ R(β) defines a linear map ev y ◦ R : RDY → Rp.W e
can represent ev y ◦ R by matrix multiplication: ev y ◦ R(β) = Vyβ, with Vy ∈ Rp×DY . The encoder
E : X → RDX is linear by definition, thus we can take L := E for the linear map in the definition
of ‘operator of neural network-type’. Define a neural network Φy : RDX → Rp by Φy(α) = VyΨ( α).
Then, we have the identity
evy ◦ S(u)= (evy ◦ R)◦ Ψ( Eu)= Φy(Lu),
for all u∈ X . This shows that S is of neural network-type. We now aim to estimate cmplx (S) in terms
of size(Ψ ). To this end, write Ψ( α)= [Ψ1(α),... ,ΨDY (α)] with component mappings Ψj : RDX → R.
Let J =
{
j
⏐⏐⏐j∈{ 1,... , DY}, Ψj ̸= 0
}
be the subset of indices for which Ψj : RDX → R is not the zero
function. Define a (sparsified) matrix ˆVy ∈ Rp×DY with jth column [ˆVy]:,j defined by
[ˆVy]:,j :=
{
[Vy]:,j, j∈ J ,
0 j /∈ J .
Then, we have∥ˆVy∥0 ≤ p|J|≤ p size(Ψ ), and identity Φy(α)= ˆVyΨ( α) for all α∈ RDX . Thus, using
the concept of sparse concatenation (2.3), we can upper bound the complexity, cmplx(S), in terms of the
size(Ψ )of the neural network Ψ as follows:
cmplx(S)≤ sup
y
size(Φy)≤ sup
y
2∥Vy∥0 + 2size(Ψ )≤ 2(p+ 1)size(Ψ ).
This is the claimed lower bound on size (Ψ ). □
A.5.2 Proof of Lemma 2.20
Proof (Lemma 2.20). We observe that with D := DX , for any y∈ Ω the encoder L := E : X → RD is
linear, and
evy ◦ S(u)= Φy(Lu), ∀ u∈ X ,
where Φy(α) = ∑ DY
j=1 Ψj(α)φj(y) defines a neural network, Φy : RD → Rp. Thus, DeepONet S =
R◦ Ψ ◦ E is of neural network-type. To estimate the complexity, cmplx (S),w el e t J 2 be the set of
indices (i, j)∈{ 1,... , DY}2, such that the ith component, [φj(y)]i, of the vector φj(y)∈ Rp is nonzero.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 52 ===
698 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
Let ˆVy ∈ Rp×DY be the matrix with entries [ ˆVy]i,j = [φj(y)]i, so that Φy(α) = ˆVyΨ( α) for all α.N o t e
thatˆVy has precisely|J 2| nonzero entries, and that |J 2|≤ size(φ), since [φj(y)]i ̸= 0 is nonzero for all
(i, j)∈ J 2. Thus, it follows that
cmplx(S)≤ sup
y
size(Φy)≤ 2|J 2|+ 2s i z e(Ψ )≤ 2(size(φ)+ size(Ψ )).
□
A.5.3 Proof of Lemma 2.22
Proof (Lemma 2.22). To see the complexity bound, we recall that for any y ∈ Ω, we can choose
Φy(· ) := Q(Ψ (· ), y) to obtain the representation
evy ◦ S(u)= Φy(Lu),
where Lu≡ E(u) is given by the linear encoder. The composition of two neural networks Q(· , y) and
Ψ(· ) can be represented by a neural network of size at most 2 size (Ψ )+ 2s i z e(Q(· , y))≤ 2s i z e(Ψ )+
2s i z e(Q). We thus have the lower bound,
cmplx(S)≤ sup
y
size(Φy)≤ 2size(Q)+ 2size(Ψ ).
This shows the claim. □
A.6 Proof of Lemma 2.26
Proof. Our aim is to show that S : L2(T; R)→ R,
S(u) :=
∫
T
σ( u(x)) dx,
is not of neural network-type. We argue by contradiction. Suppose that S was of neural network type.
By definition, there exists a linear mapping L : L2(T; R)→ Rℓ, and a neural network Φ : Rℓ→ R,f o r
some ℓ∈ N such that
S(u)= Φ(Lu). (A.16)
In the following we will consider ϕj(x) := sin(jx) for j∈ N. Since σ( t)≥ 0 for all t∈ R, and σ( t)> 0
for t > 0, we have
S(u)=
∫
Ω
σ( u(x)) dx= 0 ⇐⇒ u(x)≤ 0, ∀x∈ [0, 2π ]. (A.17)
Now, fix any D >ℓ , and consider ι : RD → L2(T; R), ιβ := ∑ D
j=1 βj sin(jx). Since ι and L are linear
mappings, it follows that
L◦ ι : RD → Rℓ, β↦→ Lιβ,
is a linear mapping. Represent this linear mapping by a matrix W ∈ Rℓ×D. In particular, by ( A.16), we
have
S(ιβ)= Φ(Wβ), ∀β∈ RD. (A.18)
Since D >ℓ ,i tf o l l o w st h a tk e r(W) ̸={ 0} is nontrivial. Let β ̸= 0 be an element in the kernel, and
consider uβ(x) := ιβ(x) = ∑ D
j=1 βj sin(jx). Since uβ(x) is not identically equal to 0, either uβ(x) or
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 53 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 699
−uβ(x)= u−β(x) must be positive somewhere in the domain T. Upon replacing β →− β if necessary,
we may wlog assume that uβ(x)> 0f o rs o m ex∈ T.F r o m(A.17) and ( A.18), it now follows that
0̸= S(uβ)= S(ιβ)= Φ(Wβ)= Φ(0)= S(0)= 0.
A contradiction. Thus, S cannot be of neural network-type. □
A.7 Proof of curse of parametric complexity for FNO, Theorem 2.27
Building on the curse of parametric complexity for operators of neural network-type, we next show that
FNOs also suffer from a similar curse, as stated in Theorem 2.27.
Proof (Theorem 2.27). Let S† : X → R be an r-times Fréchet differentiable functional satisfying the
conclusion of Theorem 2.11 (CoD for functionals of neural network-type). In the following, we show
that S† also satisfies the conclusions of Theorem 2.27. Our proof argues by contradiction: we assume
that S† can be approximated by a family of discrete FNOs satisfying the error and complexity bounds
of Theorem 2.27, i.e.,
1. Complexity bound: There exist constant c > 0, such that the discretization parameter Nϵ ∈
N, and the total number of nonzero parameters size (SNϵ
ϵ ) are bounded by Nϵ,s i z e(SNϵ
ϵ ) ≤
exp(cϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r), for all ϵ≤ ϵ.
2. Accuracy: We have
sup
u∈K
⏐⏐⏐S†(u)− SNϵ
ϵ (u)
⏐⏐⏐≤ ϵ, ∀ϵ> 0.
Then we show that this implies the existence of a family of operators of neural network-type ˜Sϵ,
which satisfy for some δ′> 0, and for all sufficiently small ϵ> 0,
• complexity bound cmplx(˜Sϵ)≤ exp(cϵ−1/(1+α+δ′)r),
• and error estimate max u∈K
⏐⏐S†(u)− ˜Sϵ(u)
⏐⏐≤ ϵ,
with c > 0 a potentially different constant. By choice of S†, the existence of ˜Sϵ is ruled out by Theorem
2.11, providing the desired contradiction.
In the following, we discuss the construction of˜Sϵ:L e tSNϵ
ϵ be a family of FNOs satisfying (1) and (2)
above. Fixϵ> 0 for the moment. To simplify notation, we will writeN= Nϵ, in the following. We recall
that, by definition, the discretized FNO SN
ϵ can be written as a composition SN
ϵ = ˜Q◦ LL◦···◦ L1◦ R,
where
R : u(x)↦→ χ( xj1,...,jd , u(xj1,...,jd )),
and
˜Q :
(
vj1,...,jd
⎞
↦→ 1
Nd
∑
j1,...,jd
q(yj1,...,jd , vj1,...,jd ),
are defined by neural networks χ and q, respectively, Lℓ is of the form
Lℓ : v↦→ σ
(
Wℓv+ F−1
N
(ˆTℓFN v
⎞
+ bℓ
⎞
, v=
(
vj1,...,jd
⎞N
j1,...,jd=1
,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 54 ===
700 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
with Wℓ ∈ Rdv×dv , Fourier multiplier ˆTℓ ={ [ˆTℓ]k}∥k∥ℓ∞≤kmax , where [ˆTℓ]k ∈ Cdv×dv , and FN (F−1
N )
denote discrete (inverse) Fourier transform, and where the bias b is determined by its Fourier coefficients
ˆbk,∥k∥ℓ∞ ≤ kmax. We also recall that the size of SN
ϵ is given by the total number of nonzero components,
i.e.,
size(SN
ϵ )= size(χ)+ size(q)+
L∑
ℓ=1
⎧
⎨
⎩∥Wℓ∥0 +∥ˆTℓ∥0 +
∑
∥k∥ℓ∞≤kmax
∥ˆbk∥0
⎫
⎬
⎭ .
We now observe that, after flattening the tensor
(
vj1,...,jd
⎞
∈ RN×···×N×dv ≃RdvNd
,
the (linear) mapping v↦→ Wℓv can be represented by multiplication against a sparse matrix with at most
∥Wℓ∥0Nd nonzero entries. For the nonlocal operator F−1
N ˆTℓFN , we note that for v∈ RdvNd
, the number
κ of components (channels) that need to be considered is bounded by κ ≤ min(dv,∥ˆTℓ∥0) ≤∥ˆTℓ∥0.
Discarding any channels that are zeroed out by ˆTℓ, a naive implementation of F−1
N ˆTℓFN thus amounts
to a matrix representation of a linear mapping RκNd
→ RκNd
, requiring at most κ2N2d ≤∥ˆTℓ∥2
0N2d
nonzero components. Thus, each discretized hidden layer Lℓ can be represented exactly by an ordinary
neural network layer Lℓ= σ( Aℓv+ cℓ) with matrix Aℓ∈ RdvNd×dvNd
and bias cℓ∈ RdvNd
, satisfying
the following bounds on the number of nonzero components:
∥Aℓ∥0 ≤∥Wℓ∥0Nd +∥ˆTℓ∥2
0N2d, ∥cℓ∥0 ≤
∑
|k|≤kmax
∥[ˆbℓ]k∥0Nd.
Similarly, the input and output layers R and ˜Q can be represented exactly by ordinary neural networks
R : RkNd
→ RdvNd
and Q : RdvNd
→ R, with
size(R)≤ Ndsize(χ) ,s i z e (Q)≤ Ndsize(q),
obtained by parallelization of χ , resp. q, at each grid point. Given the above observations, we conclude
that, with canonical identification RN×···×N×k ≃RkNd
and RN×···×N×p ≃RpNd
, the discretized FNO
SN
ϵ can be represented by an ordinary neural network Φ : RkNd
→ RpNd
, Φ = Q◦ LL ◦···◦ L1 ◦ R,
with
size(Φ)≤
L∑
ℓ=1
⎧
⎨
⎩∥Wℓ∥0Nd +∥ˆTℓ∥2
0N2d +
∑
|k|≤kmax
∥ˆbk∥0Nd
⎫
⎬
⎭
+ Ndsize(χ)+ Ndsize(q)
≤ N2dsize(SN
ϵ )2.
By assumption on SN
ϵ (for which we aim to show that it leads to a contradiction), we have size (SN
ϵ )≤
exp(cϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r), and Nϵ≤ exp(cϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r). It follows that
size(Φ)≤ N2dsize(SN
ϵ )2 ≤ exp((2d+ 2)cϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r).
In addition, Φ trivially defines an operator of neural network-type, ˜Sϵ : Cs(Ω; Rk)→ R,b y
˜Sϵ(u) := Φ
(
(u(xj1,...,jd ))N
j1,...,jd=1
⎞
.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 55 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 701
To see this, we simply note that the point-evaluation mapping L : u↦→ u(xj1,...,jd )N
j1,...,jd=1 is linear, and
hence we have the representation
˜Sϵ(u)= Φ(Lu).
By the above construction, we have ˜Sϵ(u)≡ SNϵ
ϵ (u) for all input functions u.
To summarize, assuming that a family of FNOs SNϵ
ϵ exists, satisfying (1) and (2) above, we have
constructed a family ˜Sϵ of operators of neural network type, with
sup
u∈K
⏐⏐
⏐S
†(u)− ˜Sϵ(u)
⏐⏐
⏐= sup
u∈K
⏐⏐
⏐S
†(u)− SNϵ
ϵ (u)
⏐⏐
⏐≤ ϵ,
and
cmplx(˜Sϵ)≤ size(Φ)≤ exp(c′′ϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r),
where c′′= (2d+ 2)c > 0 is a constant independent of ϵ.
By Theorem 2.11, and fixing any 0 <δ ′<δ , we also have the following lower bound for all
sufficiently small ϵ:
exp(c′ϵ−1/(1+α+δ′)r)≤ cmplx(˜Sϵ),
where c′> 0 is independent of ϵ. From the above two-sided bounds, it thus follows that
exp(c′ϵ−1/(1+α+δ′)r)≤ cmplx(˜Sϵ)≤ exp(c′′ϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r),
for all ϵsufficiently small, and where by our choice of δ′,δ:0 < 1+ α+ δ′< 1+ α+ δ and c′, c′′> 0
are constants. Since ϵ−1/(1+α+δ′)r grows faster than ϵ−1/(1+α+δ)r as ϵ→ 0, this leads to the desired
contradiction. We thus conclude that a family SNϵ
ϵ of discretized FNOs as assumed above cannot exist.
This concludes the proof. □
Appendix B. Short-time existence of Cr-solutions
The proof of short-time existence of solutions of the Hamilton–Jacobi equation ( HJ) is based on the
following Banach space implicit function theorem:
THEOREM B1 (Implicit Function Theorem, see e.g., ( Chow & Hale , 2012, section 2.2)). Let U ⊂ X,
V ⊂ Y be open subsets of Banach spaces X and Y.L e t
F : U× V → Z, (u, v)↦→ F(u, v),
be a Cp-mapping (p-times continuously Fréchet differentiable). Assume that there exist (u0, v0)∈ U× V
such that F(u0, v0)= 0, and such that the Jacobian with respect to v, evaluated at the point (u0, v0),
DvF(u0, v0) : X→ Z,
is a linear isomorphism. Then there exists a neighbourhood U0 ⊂ U of u0, and a Cp-mapping ψ : U0 →
V, such that
F(u,ψ(u))= 0, ∀ u∈ U0.
Furthermore, ψ is unique, in the sense that for any u∈ U0, F(u, v)= 0 implies v= ψ(u). ♦
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 56 ===
702 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
As a first step towards proving short-time existence for ( HJ), we prove that under the no-blowup
Assumption 3.1, the semigroup Ψ †
t (3.7) exists for any t≥ 0.
Proof (Lemma 3.3). By classical ODE theory, it is immediate that for any initial data (q0, p0, z0) ∈
Ω × Rd × R a maximal solution of the ODE system ( 3.4) exists, and is unique, over a short time-
interval. It thus remains to prove that this solution in fact exists globally, i.e., that the solution does not
escape to infinity in finite time. Since z solves˙z= L(q, p), with a right-hand side that only depends on
q and p, it will suffice to prove that the Hamiltonian trajectory ˙q =∇ pH(q, p), ˙p =− ∇qH(q, p) with
initial data (q0, p0) exists globally in time. To this end, we note that, by Assumption 3.1,w eh a v e
d
dt(1+| p|2)= 2p·˙p=− 2p·∇ qH(q, p)≤ 2LH(1+| p|2).
Gronwall’s lemma thus implies that |p|≤
√
1+| p0|2 exp(LH t) remains bounded for all t ≥ 0. This
shows that blow-up cannot occur in the p-variable in a finite time. On the other hand, the right-hand
side of the ODE system is periodic in q, and hence (by the bound on p) blow-up is also ruled out for q.
In particular, Assumption 3.1 ensures that the Hamiltonian trajectory t↦→ (q(t), p(t)) exists globally in
time. As argued above, this in turn implies the global existence of the flow map t↦→ Ψ †
t . □
We now apply the Implicit Function Theorem B.1 to prove Lemma 3.4.
Proof (Lemma 3.4). Let X= Cr
per(Ω)× Rd × R with r≥ 2. Define
F : X× Rd → Rd, (u0, q, t; q0)↦→ q− qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)),
i.e., we set
F(u0, q, t; q0) := q− qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)),
with qt : Ω× Rd → Ω, (q0, p0) ↦→ qt(q0, p0) the spatial characteristic mapping of the Hamiltonian
system ( 3.4) at time t ≥ 0, where, recall, we have assumed that u0 ∈ F. Under Assumption 3.1,t h e
spatial characteristic mapping, and hence F, is well-defined for any t ≥ 0 (see Lemma 3.3). Since
H ∈ Cr+1(Ω × Rd), the mapping Ω × Rd × R → Ω, (q0, p0, t) ↦→ qt(q0, p0) is Cr. The mapping
F1 : Ω × Cr
per(Ω) → Rd, (q0, u0) ↦→ F1(q0, u0) :=∇ qu0(q0) is Cr−1 in the first argument, and is
a continuous linear mapping in the second argument (and hence infinitely Frechet differentiable in the
second argument). Hence, the composition
(q0, u0)↦→ (q0,∇qu0(q0))↦→ qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)),
is a Cr−1 mapping. And, as a consequence, the mapping F : X× Rd → Rd is a Cr−1 mapping.
Since
F(u0, q, t; q0)= q− qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)),
we clearly have
F(u0, q0,0 ; q0)= 0,
for any q0 ∈ Ω and u0 ∈ Cr
per(Ω), and the derivative with respect to the last argument
Dq0 F(u0, q0,0 ; q0) : Rd → Rd,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 57 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 703
is given by
Dq0 F(u0, q0,0 ; q0)= Dq0
[
q− q0
]
=− 1d×d,
which defines an isomorphism Rd → Rd.
By the implicit function theorem, for any q0 ∈ Ω and u0 ∈ Cr
per(Ω), there exist ϵ= ϵ(q0, u0), r=
r(q0, u0), t∗ = t∗(q0, u0)> 0, and a mapping
ψq0,u0 : Bϵ(q0)× Br(u0)× [0, t∗)→ Rd,
such that F(q, u0, t; q0)= 0f o r
(q, u0, t)∈ Bϵ(q0)× Br(u0)× [0, t∗),
if, and only if,
q0 = ψq0,u0 (q, u0, t).
Fix u0 ∈ Cr
per(Ω) for the moment. Since Ω is compact, we can choose a finite number of points
q(1)
0 , ... , q(m)
0 , such that
Ω ⊂
m⋃
j=1
Bϵ(qj
0,u0)(qj
0).
Let
t∗(u0) := min
j=1,...,m
t∗(qj
0, u0),
r(u0) := min
j=1,...,m
r(qj
0, u0).
Due to the uniqueness property of each ψqj
0,u0
, j= 1,... , m, all of these mappings have the same values
on overlapping domains. Hence, we can combine them into a single map
ψu0 : Ω× Br(u0)(u0)× [0, t∗(u0))→ Rd.
Furthermore, since ψqj
0,u0
∈ Cr−1,w ea l s oh a v eψu0 ∈ Cr−1. Similarly, we can cover the compact set
F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω) by a finite number of open balls Br(u(k)
0 )(u(k)
0 ), k= 1,... , K,
F ⊂
K⋃
k=1
Br(u(k)
0 )(u(k)
0 ).
Setting T∗ := mink=1,...,K t∗(u(k)
0 )> 0, the uniqueness property of ψu(k)
0
again implies that these
mappings agree on overlapping domains. Hence, we can combine them into a global map, and obtain a
map
ψ : Ω× F× [0, T∗)→ Rd,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 58 ===
704 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
which satisfies F(q, u0, t; ψ(q, u0, t))= 0 for all q∈ Ω, u0 ∈ F and t < T∗. Furthermore, this ψ is still
a Cr−1 map and it is unique, in the sense that
F(q, u0, t; q0)= 0 ⇔ q0 = ψ(q, u0, t), ∀ q∈ Ω, u0 ∈ Cr
per(Ω), t < T∗,
i.e., for any u0 ∈ F and t ∈ [0, T∗),w eh a v eq = qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)) if and only if q0 = ψ(q, u0, t).I n
particular, this shows that for any u0 ∈ F, t∈ [0, T∗),t h e Cr−1-mapping
Φ†
t (· ; u0) : Ω → Ω, q0 ↦→ Φ†
t (q0; u0) := qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)),
is invertible, with inverse q↦→ ψ(q, u0, t)∈ Cr−1. This implies the claim. □
Next, we apply Lemma 3.4 to prove short-time existence of solutions for ( HJ).
Proof (Proposition 3.2). Let T∗ be the maximal time such that the spatial characteristic mapping Φ†
t,u0 :
Ω → Ω, q0 ↦→ qt(q0,∇qu0(q0)) is invertible, for any t∈ [0, T∗) and for all u0 ∈ F.W eh a v eT∗ > 0,
by Lemma 3.4. We denote by Φ†
−t,u0 : Ω → Ω the inverse Φ†
−t,u0 := [Φ†
t,u0 ]−1. By the method of
characteristics, a solution u(q, t) of the Hamilton–Jacobi equations must satisfy
u(q, t)= u0(q0)+
∫t
0
L(qτ , pτ ) dτ , L(q, p) := p·∇ pH(q, p)− H(q, p),( B . 1 )
where q0 = Φ†
−t,u0 (q), qτ , pτ are the trajectories of the Hamiltonian ODE ( 3.1) with initial data
q0,∇qu0(q0). Given a fixed u0 ∈ F, we use the above expression to define u : Ω× [0, T∗)→ R.
We first observe that u∈ Cr−1(Ω× [0, T∗)), as it is the composition of Cr−1 mappings,
u(q, t)= u0(q0)+
∫t
0
L(qτ (q0, p0), pτ (q0, p0)) dτ ,
where q0 = Φ−t,u0 (q), p0 =∇ qu0(Φ−t,u0 (q)) are Cr−1-functions of q. In particular, since r ≥ 2, this
implies that u is at least C1. Evaluating du(qt, t)/dt along a fixed trajectory, we find that
∂tu(qt, t)+ H(qt, pt)=
(
pt −∇ qu(qt, t)
⎞
· DpH(qt, pt).( B . 2 )
Thus, to show that u is a classical solution of ( HJ), it remains to show that pt =∇ qu(qt, t) for all t ∈
[0, T∗). Assume that u∈ C2
per for the moment. We first note that for the jth component of pt−∇ qu(qt, t),
we have (with implicit summation over repeated indices, following the ‘Einstein summation rule’)
d
dt
[
pj
t − ∂qj u(qt, t)
]
=− ∂qj H(qt, pt)− ∂2
qj,qk u(qt, t)∂pk H(qt, pt)
− ∂qj∂tu(qt, t).
Next, we note that by the invertibility of the spatial characteristic mapping q0 ↦→ qt, we can write ( B.2)
in the form
∂tu(q, t)=− H(q, P(q, t))+
(
P(q, t)−∇ qu(q, t)
⎞
· DpH(q, P(q, t)),
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 59 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 705
where P(q, t) := pt
(
Φ†
−t,u0 (q),∇qu0(Φ†
−t,u0(q))
⎞
. This implies that
∂qj∂tu(q, t)=− ∂qj H(q, P(q, t))− ∂pk H(q, P(q, t))∂qj Pk(q, t)
+
(
∂qj Pk(q, t)− ∂2
qj,qk u(q, t)
⎞
· ∂pk H(q, P(q, t))
+
(
Pk(q, t)− ∂qk u(q, t)
⎞
· ∂qj
[
∂pk H(q, P(q, t))
]
=− ∂qj H(q, P(q, t))− ∂2
qj,qk u(q, t)· ∂pk H(q, P(q, t))
+
(
Pk(q, t)− ∂qk u(q, t)
⎞
· Aj,k(q, P(q, t)).
We point out that on the last line, we have introduced Aj,k(q, t) := ∂qj
[
∂pk H(q, P(q, t))
]
which is a
continuous function of q and t. Choosing now q= qt, so that P(q, t)= pt, we thus obtain
∂qj∂tu(qt, t)=− ∂qj H(qt, pt)− ∂2
qj,qk u(qt, t)· ∂pk H(qt, pt)
+
[
pk
t − ∂qk u(qt, t)
]
· Aj,k(q, t).
Substitution in the ODE for pt −∇ qu(qt, t) yields
d
dt
[
pt −∇ qu(qt, t)
]
=− A(qt, t)·
[
pt −∇ qu(qt, t)
]
,
where A(qt, t) is the matrix with components (Aj,k(qt, t)). Since [ pt −∇ qu(qt, t)]|t=0 = 0, this implies
that
pt =∇ qu(qt, t), ∀ t∈ [0, T∗),( B . 3 )
along the trajectory. At this point, the conclusion ( B.3) has been obtained under the assumption that
u∈ C2
per, which is only ensured ap r i o r iif r≥ 3.
To prove the result also for the case r = 2, we can apply the above argument to smooth Hϵ, uϵ
0,
which approximate the given H and u0, and for uϵ defined by the method of characteristics ( B.1) with
u0, H replaced by the smooth approximations uϵ
0, Hϵ. Then, by the above argument, for anyϵ-regularized
trajectory (qϵ
t , pϵ
t ),w eh a v e
pϵ
t =∇ quϵ(qϵ
t , t).
Choosing a sequence such that Hϵ Cr+1
→ H, uϵ
0
Cr
→ u0 as ϵ→ 0, the corresponding characteristic solution
uϵ defined by ( B.1) (with Hϵ and uϵ
0 in place of H and u0) converges in Cr−1. Since r− 1 = 1, this
implies that pt = limϵ→0 pϵ
t = limϵ→0∇quϵ(qϵ
t , t)=∇ qu(qt, t).
Thus, we conclude that u ∈ Cr−1(Ω × [0, T∗)) defined by ( B.1) is a classical solution of the
Hamilton–Jacobi equations ( HJ). We finally have to show that, in fact, u ∈ Cr
per(Ω × [0, T∗)).
Cr-differentiability in space follows readily from the fact that, by ( B3), we have ∇qu(qt, t) =
pt(q0,∇qu0(q0)). By the invertibility of the spatial characteristic map, this can be equivalently written
in the form
∇qu(q, t)= pt(Φ†
−t,u0(q),∇qu0(Φ†
−t,u0 (q))),( B . 4 )
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 60 ===
706 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
where on the right-hand side, (q0, p0) ↦→ pt(q0, p0), q0 ↦→∇ qu0(q0) and (q, t) ↦→ Φ†
−t,u0 (q, t) are all
Cr−1 mappings. Thus,∇qu is a Cr−1-function. Furthermore, by (HJ), this implies that ∂tu=− H(q,∇qu)
is also a Cr−1 function. This allows us to conclude that u∈ Cr
per(Ω× [0, T∗)). The additional bound on
∥u(· , t)∥Cr follows from the trivial estimate
∥u(· , t)∥Cr ≤ C
(
∥u∥L∞ +∥∇qu(· , t)∥Cr−1
⎞
,
combined with ( B.1) and ( B.4), and the fact that q ↦→ Φ†
−t,u0 (q) is a Cr−1 mapping with continuous
dependence on u0 ∈ F and t∈ [0, T], and (q0, p0)↦→ pt(q0, p0) is a Cr-mapping, so that
∥∇qu(· , t)∥Cr−1 ≤ sup
t∈[0,T]
sup
u0∈F
∥pt(Φ†
−t,u0 (· ),∇qu0(Φ†
−t,u0(· )))∥Cr−1 <∞,
for any initial data u0 ∈ F. □
Appendix C. Reconstruction from scattered data
The purpose of this appendix is to prove Proposition4.2. This is achieved through three lemmas, followed
by the proof of the proposition itself, employing these lemmas.
The first lemma is the following special case of the Vitali covering lemma, a well-known geometric
result from measure theory (see e.g. ( Stein & Shakarchi, 2009 , Lemma 1.2)):
LEMMA C1. (Vitali covering). If h > 0 and Q={ q1,... , qN} is a set for which the domain
Ω ⊂
N⋃
j=1
Bh(qj),
is contained in the union of balls of radius h around the qj, then there exists a subset Q′={ qi1 ,... , qim}
such that Bh(qik )∩ Bh(qiℓ)=∅ for all k,ℓ, and
Ω ⊂
m⋃
k=1
B3h(qik ).
♦
REMARK C2. Given Q ={ q1,... , qN}, the proof of Lemma C1 (see e.g. ( Stein & Shakarchi , 2009,
Lemma 1.2)) shows that the subsetQ′⊂ Q of Lemma C1 can be found by the following greedy algorithm,
which proceeds by iteratively adding elements to Q′(the following is in fact the basis for Algorithm 1
in the main text):
1. Start with j1 = 1 and Q′
1 ={ q1}.
2. Iteration step: given Q′
m ={ qj1 ,... , qjm}⊂ Q, check whether there exists qk ∈ Q, such that
Bh(qk)∩
m⋃
ℓ=1
Bh(qjℓ)=∅ .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 61 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 707
• If yes: define jn+1 := k and Q′
m+1 :={ qj1 ,... , qjm+1}.
• If not: terminate the algorithm and set Q′:= Q′
m ={ qj1 ,... , qjm}.
♦
B a s e do nL e m m aC.1, we can now state the following basic result:
LEMMA C3. Given a set Q={ q1,... , qN}⊂ Ω with fill distance hQ,Ω , the subset Q′⊂ Q determined
by the pruning Algorithm 1 has fill distance hQ′,Ω ≤ 3hQ,Ω and separation distance ρQ′≥ hQ,Ω , and Q′
is quasi-uniform with distortion constant κ = 3, i.e.,
ρQ′≤ hQ′,Ω ≤ 3ρQ′.
♦
Proof. By definition of hQ,Ω (cf. Definition 4.1), we have
Ω ⊂
N⋃
j=1
BhQ,Ω (qj).
Let Q′={ qj1 , ... , qjm}⊂ Q be the subset determined by Algorithm 1 (reproduced in Remark C2). Q′
satisfies the conclusion of the Vitali covering lemma C1 with h= hQ,Ω ; thus,
Ω ⊂
m⋃
k=1
B3h(qjk ),( C . 1 )
and Bh(qjk )∩ Bh(qjℓ)=∅ for all k̸= ℓ. The inclusion ( C.1)i m p l i e st h a t
hQ′,Ω = sup
q∈Ω
min
k=1,...,m
⏐⏐⏐q− qjk
⏐⏐⏐≤ 3h= 3hQ,Ω .
On the other hand, the fact that Bh(qjk )∩ Bh(qjℓ)=∅ implies that 1
2
⏐⏐qjℓ− qjk
⏐⏐≥ h= hQ,Ω for all k̸= ℓ,
and hence ρQ′≥ hQ,Ω .T h u s ,w eh a v e
hQ′,Ω ≤ 3hQ,Ω ≤ 3ρQ′.
The bound ρQ′≤ hQ′,Ω always holds (for convex sets); to see this, choose qjk , qjℓ such that ρQ′=
1
2
⏐⏐qjk − qjℓ
⏐⏐realizes the minimal separation distance. Let q be the mid-point 1
2
(
qjk + qjℓ
⎞
, so that⏐⏐q− qjk
⏐⏐=
⏐⏐q− qjℓ
⏐⏐= 1
2
⏐⏐qjk − qjℓ
⏐⏐= ρQ′. We note that
⏐⏐q− qjr
⏐⏐≥ ρQ′for any qjr ∈ Q′, since
2ρQ′≤
⏐⏐
⏐q
jr − qjk
⏐⏐
⏐≤
⏐⏐
⏐q
jr − q
⏐⏐
⏐+
⏐⏐
⏐
q− qjk
⏐⏐
⏐=
⏐⏐
⏐
q− qjr
⏐⏐
⏐+ ρ
Q′,
i.e.,
⏐⏐q− qjr
⏐⏐≥ ρQ′for r= 1,... , m. We conclude that
ρQ′≤ min
r=1,...,m
⏐⏐
⏐
q− qjr
⏐⏐
⏐≤ sup
q∈Q
min
r=1,...,m
⏐⏐
⏐q− q
jr
⏐⏐
⏐= h
Q′,Ω .
□
LEMMA C.4. Let Ω = [0, 2π ]d ⊂ Rd,l e t r ≥ 2 and let κ ≥ 1. There exists C = C(d, r,κ) > 0 and
γ = γ( d, r, κ) > 0, such that for all f † ∈ Cr(Ω) and all Q⊂ Ω, quasi-uniform with respect to κ, and
with fill distance hQ,Ω , the approximation error of the moving least squares interpolation (4.2) with exact
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 62 ===
708 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
data zj = f †(qj), and parameter δ := γ hz,Q, is bounded as follows:
∥f † − fz,Q∥L∞ ≤ Chr
Q,Ω∥f †∥Cr .
♦
Proof. This is immediate from ( Wendland, 2004, Corollary 4.8). □
Based on Lemma C4, we can also derive a reconstruction estimate, when the interpolation data
{qj,†, f †(qj,†)}N
j=1 is only known up to small errors in both the position qj ≈ qj,† and the values
zj ≈ f †(qj,†), and this is Proposition4.2 stated in the main body of the text. We now prove this proposition.
Proof (Proposition 4.2). Let ψ : Rd → [0, 1] be a compactly supported C∞ function, such that ψ(0)=
1,∥ψ∥L∞ ≤ 1 and ψ(q)= 0f o r|q|≥ 1/2. Define
˜f(q) := f †(q)+
N∑
j=1
(
zj − f †(qj)
⎞
ψ
(
q− qj
ρQ
⎞
.
Note that, by assumption, we have
|qj − qk|≥| qj,† − qk,†|− 2δ≥ 2(ρQ − ρ)≥ ρQ,
for all j̸= k. In particular, this implies that the functions
q↦→ ψ
(
q− qj
ρQ
⎞
,
have disjoint support for different values of j. Thus, for any j= 1,... , N,w eh a v e˜f(qj)= zj, and fz,Q is
the (exact) moving least squares approximation of ˜f . From Proposition C.4 it follows that
∥˜f − fz,Q∥L∞ ≤ C∥˜f∥Cr hr
Q,Ω .
We now note that
|zj − f †(qj)|≤| zj − f †(qj,†)|+| f †(qj,†)− f †(qj)|≤ ϵ+∥f †∥Cr ρ.
On the one hand (due to the disjoint supports of the bump functions), we can now make the estimate
∥˜f − f †∥L∞ ≤ max
j=1,...,N
|zj − f †(qj)|≤ ϵ+∥f∥Cr ρ.
On the other hand (again due to the disjoint supports of the bump functions), we also have
∥˜f∥Cr ≤∥f †∥Cr + max
j=1,...,N
|zj − f †(qj)|ρ−r
Q ∥ψ∥Cr
≤∥f †∥Cr + ϵ+∥f †∥Cr ρ
ρr
Q
∥ψ∥Cr .
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 63 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 709
These two estimates imply that
∥f † − fz,Q∥L∞ ≤∥f † −˜f∥L∞ +∥˜f − fz,Q∥L∞
≤
(
ϵ+∥f †∥C1 ρ
⎞
+ C
(
∥f †∥Cr +
(
ϵ+∥f †∥C1 ρ
⎞∥ψ∥Cr
ρr
Q
⎞
hr
Q,Ω .
Taking into account that hQ,Ω/ρQ ≤ κ is bounded, that ∥ψ∥Cr is independent of f †, and introducing a
new constant C= C(d, r,κ,∥ψ∥Cr )> 0, we obtain
∥f † − fz,Q∥L∞ ≤ C
(
∥f †∥Cr hr
Q,Ω + ϵ+∥f †∥C1 ρ
⎞
,
as claimed. □
Appendix D. Complexity estimates for HJ-Net approximation
In the last section, we have shown that given a set of initial data F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω), with r ≥ 2 and Ω =
[0, 2π ]d, the method of characteristics is applicable for a positive time T∗ > 0. In the present section, we
will combine this result with the proposed HJ-Net framework to derive quantitative error and complexity
estimates for the approximation of the solution operator of ( HJ). This will require estimates for the
approximation of the Hamiltonian flow Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t by neural networks, as well as an estimate for the
reconstruction error resulting from the pruned moving least squares operator R.
D.1 Approximation of Hamiltonian flow
Proof (Proposition 5.4). It follows from ( Ya r o t s ky, 2017, Theorem 1) (and a simple scaling argument),
that there exists a constant C = C(r, d)> 0, such that for any ϵ> 0, there exists a neural network
Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t satisfying the bound,
sup
(q0,p0,z0)∈Ω×[−M,M]d×[−M,M]
⏐⏐⏐Ψt(q0, p0, z0)− Ψ †
t (q0, p0, z0)
⏐⏐⏐≤ ϵ,( D . 1 )
and such that
depth(Ψt)≤ C log
(
Mr∥Ψ †
t ∥Cr
ϵ
⎞
,
size(Ψt)≤ C
(
Mr∥Ψ †
t ∥Cr
ϵ
⎞(2d+1)/r
log
(
Mr∥Ψ †
t ∥Cr
ϵ
⎞
,
where∥Ψ †
t ∥Cr =∥Ψ †
t ∥Cr(Ω×[−M,M]d×[−M,M]) denotes the Cr norm on the relevant domain. To prove the
claim, we note that for any trajectory (qt, pt) satisfying the Hamiltonian ODE system
˙qt =∇ pH(qt, pt), ˙pt =−∇ qH(qt, pt),( D . 2 )
with initial data (q0, p0)∈ Ω× [−M, M]d,w eh a v eb ya s s u m p t i o n3.1:
d
dt(1+| pt|2)= pt ·˙pt =− 2pt ·∇ qH(qt, pt)≤ 2LH(1+| pt|2).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 64 ===
710 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
Integration of this inequality implies|pt|2 ≤ (1+| p0|2) exp(2LH t)≤ (1+ dM2) exp(2LH t). Taking also
into account that M ≥ 1, this implies that pt ∈ [−βM,βM]d, where β = (1+
√
d) exp(LH t) depends
only on d, LH and t. Since pt remains uniformly bounded and since q ↦→ H(q, p) is 2π -periodic, it
follows that for any (q0, p0) ∈ Ω × [−M, M]d the Hamiltonian trajectory (qt, pt) starting at (q0, p0)
stays in Ω× [−βM,βM].
Recall that Ψ †
t (q0, p0, z0)= (qt, pt, zt) is the flow map of the Hamiltonian ODE (D.2) combined with
the action integral
zt = z0 +
∫t
0
[
pt ·∇ pH(qt, pt)− H(qt, pt)
]
dτ .( D . 3 )
Since the Hamiltonian trajectories starting at(q0, p0)∈ Ω×[−M, M]d are confined toΩ×[−βM,βM]d
and since the right-hand side of ( D.2) and (D.3) involve only first-order derivatives of H, it follows from
basic ODE theory that there exists C= C(∥H∥Cr+1(Ω×[−βM,βM]d , M, t, r)> 0, such that the Cr-norm of
the flow can be bounded by
∥Ψt∥Cr(Ω×[−M,M]d×[−M,M]) ≤ C(∥H∥Cr+1(Ω×[−βM,βM]d , M, t, r).
In particular, we finally conclude that there exist constants β = β(LH , d, t) and C =
C(∥H∥Cr+1(Ω×[−βM,βM]d), M, t, r)> 0, such that for any ϵ> 0, there exists a neural network Ψt ≈ Ψ †
t
satisfying the bound ( D.1), and such that
depth(Ψt)≤ C log
(
ϵ−1
⎞
,s i z e (Ψt)≤ Cϵ−(2d+1)/r log
(
ϵ−1
⎞
.
□
D.2 Reconstruction error
Proof. (Proposition 5.6)L e t f † ∈ Cr
per(Ω) be given with r ≥ 2, and let {qj, zj}N
j=1 be approximate
interpolation data, with
|qj − qj,†|≤ hr
Q,Ω , |zj − f †(qj,†)|≤ hr
Q,Ω .
The assertion of this proposition is restricted to Q† ={ qj,†}N
j=1 satisfying hQ†,Ω ≤ h0 for a constant
h0 (to be determined below). We may wlog assume that h0 ≤ 1/16 in the following. Denote Q :=
{qj}N
j=1. We recall that the first step in the reconstruction Algorithm 2 consists in an application of the
pruning Algorithm 1 to determine pruned interpolation points Q′={ qj1 ,... , qjm}⊂ Q, such that (cf.
Lemma C3)
ρQ′≤ hQ′,Ω ≤ 3ρQ′, hQ′,Ω ≤ 3hQ,Ω , hQ,Ω ≤ ρQ′.
Step 1: Write Q′,† ={ qj1,†,... , qjm,†}. Our first goal is to show that Q′† is quasi-uniform:T ot h i s
end, we note that by definition of the separation distance and the upper bound on the distance of qj,† and
qj:
ρQ′,† ≥ ρQ′− 2m a x
k
|qjk ,† − qjk|≥ ρQ′− 2hr
Q†,Ω .
By the definition of the fill distance, and the assumption that hQ†,Ω ≤ h0 ≤ 1/2 and r≥ 2, we also have
hQ†,Ω ≤ hQ,Ω + sup
j
|qj − qj,†|≤ hQ,Ω + hr
Q†,Ω ≤ hQ,Ω + 1
2 hQ†,Ω ,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 65 ===
PARAMETRIC COMPLEXITY OF OPERA TOR LEARNING 711
implying the upper bound hQ†,Ω ≤ 2hQ,Ω ≤ 2ρQ′. Similarly, we can show that hQ′,†,Ω ≤ 2hQ′,Ω .
Substitution in the lower bound on ρQ′,† above and using that h0 ≤ 1/16, yields
ρQ′,† ≥ ρQ′− 2ρ˜Q′(2hQ,Ω)r−1 ≥ ρQ′(1− 2(2h0)r−1)≥ 3
4ρQ′.
Thus, we conclude that
hQ′,†,Ω ≤ 2hQ′,Ω ≤ 6ρQ′≤ 12ρQ′,† .
Since we always have ρQ′,† ≤ hQ′,†,Ω , we conclude that Q′,† is quasi-uniform with κ = 12.
Step 2: Next, we intend to apply Proposition 4.2 with Q′,† in place of Q† and with ρ = ϵ= hr
Q†,Ω :
To this end, it remains to show that ρ ≤ 1
2ρQ′,† is bounded by half the separation distance. To see this,
we note that by the above bounds (recall also that h0 ≤ 1/16),
ρ≡ hr
Q†,Ω ≤ hr−1
0 hQ†,Ω ≤ 1
16 hQ†,Ω ≤ 1
16ρQ′≤ 1
8ρQ′,† < 1
2ρQ′,† ,
showing thatρ< 1
2ρQ′,† . We can thus apply Proposition4.2 to conclude that there exist constantsC, h0 >
0 (with h0 ≤ 1/16), such that if hQ†,Ω ≤ h0/9, we have
hQ′,†,Ω ≤ 2hQ′,Ω ≤ 6hQ,Ω ≤ 9hQ†,Ω ≤ h0,
and hence
∥f † − fz,Q∥L∞ ≤ C
(
∥f †∥Cr(Ω) + ϵ+∥f †∥C1(Ω)ρ
⎞
≤ 2C
(
1+∥f †∥Cr(Ω)
⎞
hr
Q†,Ω .
Replacing h0 → h0/9 and C→ 2C now yields the claimed result of Proposition 5.6. □
Proof. (Proposition 5.7). Let q0,˜q0 ∈ Ω and u0 ∈ F be given, and denote by (qτ , pτ ) the solution of the
Hamiltonian ODE, with initial value (q0, p0)= (q0,∇qu0(q0)).D e f i n e(˜qτ ,˜pτ ) similarly.
By compactness of F ⊂ Cr
per(Ω) ⊂ C2
per(Ω), there exists a constant M > 0, such that |p0|,|˜p0|≤
∥u0∥C2(Ω) ≤ M. By continuity of the flow map, there exists M > 0, such that
|pτ|,|˜pτ|≤ M, ∀τ ∈ [0, t].
Then, we have
d
dτ|(qτ , pτ )− (˜qτ ,˜pτ )|≤
⏐⏐∇H(qτ , pτ )−∇ H(˜qτ ,˜pτ )
⏐⏐
≤
(
sup
q∈Ω,|p|≤M
∥D2H(q, p)∥
⎞
|(qτ , pτ )− (˜qτ ,˜pτ )|,
where D2H denotes the Hessian of H and∥D2H∥is the matrix norm induced by the Euclidean vector
norm. Further denoting
∥D2H∥∞ := sup
q∈Ω,|p|≤M
∥D2H(q, p)∥,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026

=== PAGE 66 ===
712 S. LANTHALER AND A. M. STUART
then by Gronwall’s inequality, it follows that
|(qt, pt)− (˜qt,˜pt)|≤ e∥D2H∥∞t|(q0, p0)− (˜q0,˜p0)|.
Furthermore, since p0 =∇ qu0(q0), and ˜p0 =∇ qu0(˜q0),w eh a v e|p0 −˜p0|≤∥ u0∥C2|q0 −˜q0|≤
M|q0 −˜q0|, which implies that
|(qt, pt)− (˜qt,˜pt)|≤ e∥D2H∥∞t|(q0, p0)− (˜q0,˜p0)|
≤ (1+ M)e∥D2H∥∞t|q0 −˜q0|.
Therefore, Φ†
t,u0 (q0)= qt, Φ†
t,u0(˜q0)=˜qt satisfy the estimate
⏐⏐
⏐Φ
†
t,u0(q0)− Φ†
t,u0 (˜q0)
⏐⏐
⏐≤ C|q
0 −˜q0|,
with constant
C= (1+ M) exp
(
t sup
q∈Ω,|p|≤M
∥D2H(q, p)∥
⎞
,
which depends only on t, H and on F (via M and M), but is independent of the particular choice of u0.
Thus, if
Ω ⊂
N⋃
j=1
Bh(qj),
then
Ω ⊂
N⋃
j=1
BCh(Φ†
t,u0(qj)),
for any u0 ∈ F. This implies the claim. □
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/imajna/article/46/2/647/8236424 by Head Serials and Electronic Resources Dept user on 02 June 2026
